European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

European Journal of Operational Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ejor

Discrete Optimization

A bi-objective heuristic approach for green identical parallel machine
scheduling
Davide Anghinolﬁ a, Massimo Paolucci b,∗, Roberto Ronco b
a
b

IROI Srl, Salita S. Viale, Genova 16128, Italy
Department of Informatics, Bioengineering, Robotics and Systems Science, University of Genova, Via Opera Pia 13, Genova 16145, Italy

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 24 May 2019
Accepted 10 July 2020
Available online 15 July 2020
Keywords:
Scheduling
Identical parallel machines
Bi-objective optimization heuristics
Makespan
Total energy consumption

a b s t r a c t
Sustainability in manufacturing has become a fundamental topic in the scientiﬁc literature due to the
preeminent role of manufacturing industry in total world energy consumption and carbon emission. This
paper tackles the multi-objective combinatorial optimization problem of scheduling jobs on multiple parallel machines, while minimizing both the makespan and the total energy consumption. The electricity
prices vary according to a time-of-use policy, as in many cases of practical interest. In order to face
this problem, an ad-hoc heuristic method is developed. The ﬁrst part of the method, called Split-Greedy
heuristic, consists in an improved and reﬁned version of the constructive heuristic (CH) proposed in
Wang, Wang, Yu, Ma and Liu (2018). The second part, called Exchange Search, is a novel local search
procedure aimed at improving the quality of the Pareto optimal solutions. The experimental results prove
the effectiveness of the proposed method with respect to three competitors: CH, NSGA-III, and MOEA/D.
© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
In recent years, sustainability in manufacturing industry has become a fundamental topic in the scientiﬁc literature. Consideration
of aspects such as the reduction of resources consumption and carbon footprint in manufacturing production is driven by concerns
for energy costs and climate changes. Such sustainability issues
have increased the interest in actions aiming at improving energy
eﬃciency in manufacturing production (Despeisse, Ball, Evans, &
Levers, 2012). Strategies to pursue energy eﬃciency can consist in
revising production processes and in investing on new equipment
(Mori, Fujishima, Inamasu, & Oda, 2011). However, a more attractive possibility from the economic standpoint is to include objectives related to energy consumption in new operational management approaches (Fang, Uhan, Zhao, & Sutherland, 2013). In fact,
even though the energy cost has usually been considered as an
externality with respect to manufacturing production, in the last
few years increasing attention has been devoted to the adoption
of planning and scheduling approaches aiming at improving sustainability by reducing the energy consumption (Gahm, Denz, Dirr,
& Tuma, 2016). As a consequence, the notion of energy-aware,
energy-eﬃcient or green scheduling appears often in the recent

∗

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: davide.anghinolﬁ@iroi.it (D. Anghinolﬁ), massimo.paolucci@
unige.it (M. Paolucci), roberto.ronco@edu.unige.it (R. Ronco).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.07.020
0377-2217/© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

literature (e.g., Safarzadeh & Niaki, 2019; Zhang & Chiong, 2016).
This paper, in particular, deals with a class of predictive scheduling
problems (Pinedo, 2012). Scheduling consists in deﬁning a detailed
plan for the use of the available machines in order to perform a
set of production activities (also called jobs). Scheduling is called
predictive when all the relevant data are assumed known and deterministic, and the plan is deﬁned before its actual realization in
the shop ﬂoor. In general, scheduling involves three distinct decisions: assignment, i.e., dispatching the jobs to the machines providing the required kind of processing; sequencing, i.e., establishing the order of processing for the jobs assigned to each machine;
timing, i.e., specifying the time instants at which the processing
of each job on the assigned machine must start. Several possibilities associated with these three types of decisions can be exploited
to deﬁne schedules aiming at reducing the energy consumption. If
the jobs can be processed by alternative machines with different
energy requirements, which may depend both on the machine and
on the job, energy cost can be taken into consideration in the assignment of jobs to machines (Paolucci, Anghinolﬁ, & Tonelli, 2017;
Safarzadeh & Niaki, 2019). Whenever the sequencing and timing
introduce idle times on the machines, the possibility of turning
off and on the machines can be considered (Mouzon, Yildirim, &
Twomey, 2007), and the option of controlling the transition between different machine states can be taken into account as well
(Che, Wu, Peng, & Yan, 2017a; May, Stahl, Taisch, & Prabhu, 2015).
Energy cost reduction can also be pursued by exploiting time-ofuse (TOU) electricity prices, i.e., a tariff scheme according to which

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

the price of energy can vary in different time slots during a day.
TOU prices favor energy cost savings by scheduling the production
activities so that working loads are shifted from higher cost peak
periods to cheaper off-peak ones to take advantage of lower energy
prices (Che, Zhang, & Wu, 2017b; Shrouf, Ordieres-Meré, GarcíaSanchez, & Ortega-Mier, 2014; Wang, Wang, Yu, Ma, & Liu, 2018;
Zhang, Zhao, Fang, & Sutherland, 2014). In addition, the reduction
of the peak of energy demand (also called peak shaving) is considered in the timing phase (Bruzzone, Anghinolﬁ, Paolucci, & Tonelli,
2012). Finally, since in certain manufacturing systems the machines
can work at different speeds (thus consuming energy at different
rates), machine speed scaling (Fang et al., 2013; Mansouri, Aktas, &
Besikci, 2016) or the possibility of controlling the processing times
of the jobs (Giglio, Paolucci, & Roshani, 2017; Li, Shi, Yang, & Cheng,
2011) is also studied. Implementing an energy-eﬃcient strategy
in manufacturing scheduling requires to combine green metrics
with traditional performance indicators (May et al., 2015; Taticchi,
Tonelli, & Pasqualino, 2013). Thus, green scheduling problems are
often formulated as bi-objective ones to model the trade-off between energy consumption or cost, and a main classic scheduling
objective, such as makespan or jobs’ tardiness. In particular, in this
paper we propose a new effective scheduling heuristic to face the
bi-objective green scheduling problem emerged from a real manufacturing context (automobile stamping die), recently proposed by
Wang et al. (2018). Such a problem consists of scheduling a set of
jobs on a set of identical parallel machines, considering TOU energy prices and minimizing both the makespan (the completion
time of the whole set of jobs) and the total energy consumption
(TEC) expressed as the total energy cost. In Wang et al. (2018) a
constructive heuristic (CH) method, which is also extended with
a local search procedure, is proposed and tested on two sets of
problem instances (small-scale and medium- and large-scale). In
Wang et al. (2018) CH is compared with NSGA-II, which was ﬁrst
proposed in Deb, Pratap, Agarwal, and Meyarivan (2002) and then
improved in Deb and Jain (2014).
The main contributions of the this paper are brieﬂy summarized as follows: (a) the considered problem is analyzed highlighting several theoretical properties, which can be exploited to produce solutions of better quality with respect to CH; (b) an issue affecting CH causing the production of unfeasible solutions for some
instances is underlined and discussed; (c) an improved local search
procedure based on the developed theoretical analysis is proposed;
(d) the results obtained from an extended experimental campaign
are presented and discussed. The rest of the paper is structured
as follows. In Section 2, the relevant literature is reviewed. In
Section 3, the considered problem is deﬁned. In Section 4, the proposed heuristic approach, together with its theoretical foundation,
is introduced. Section 5 illustrates the extended experimental analysis, and ﬁnally Section 6 draws the conclusions.
2. Literature review
We ﬁrst mention some of the most signiﬁcant among the most
recent works on the extensive ﬁeld of multi-objective scheduling;
afterwards, we focus on the literature on green scheduling.
Shao, Pi, and Shao (2019) present a Pareto-based estimation
distribution algorithm to simultaneously optimize the makespan
and the total weight tardiness for a no-wait ﬂowshop scheduling in a distributed factories environment. Instead, Jia, Li, Li, and
Chen (2020) propose a Pareto-based ant colony optimization algorithm to minimise the makespan and the total cost for jobs rejection in a batch scheduling problem on a set of parallel batch
machines with non-identical capacities. Alhadi, Kacem, Laroche,
and Osman (2020) consider the multi-objective scheduling problem of minimizing the maximum lateness and the makespan on
two identical machines, proposing an exact algorithm based on a

417

dynamic programming, together with two fully polynomial time
approximation schemes, to generate the complete Pareto Frontier
in a pseudo-polynomial time. Meng, Rao, and Luo (2020) present a
new mixed-integer programming modeling a bi-objective scheduling problem in a metal-cutting plant, including both identical and
unrelated parallel machines, to minimize the total makespan and
total tardiness. Finally, Queiroz and Mundim (2020) propose a
multi-objective variable neighborhood descent heuristic to solve a
bi-objective parallel machine scheduling problem with sequencedependent setup times, where the makespan and the ﬂow time are
simultaneously minimized.
In recent years, the number of works dealing with the reduction of energy consumption or cost, alongside the optimization of
classic objectives for manufacturing scheduling, has shown a signiﬁcant increase. In this regard, two valuable surveys are due to
Giret, Trentesaux, and Prabhu (2015) and Gahm et al. (2016). Several approaches for scheduling problems which consider energy efﬁciency as an objective in different machine environments have
been proposed. For instance, for single machine problems, we can
mention the works based on the optimization of the machine operating modes by Mouzon et al. (2007) and Shrouf et al. (2014).
In ﬂow shops, Zhang et al. (2014) consider TOU energy prices,
while Mansouri et al. (2016) exploit the different energy consumption levels associated with the variable speeds of machines. Among
the most recent papers, both Wang et al. (2018) and Safarzadeh
and Niaki (2019) consider parallel machine environments and provide a quite extended literature review for this class of problems. The approaches proposed for energy eﬃcient parallel machine scheduling are based on multi-objective optimization techniques and algorithms, and exploit some speciﬁc characteristics of
the manufacturing production context under concern. Energy consumption is taken into account together with the minimization of
the makespan (Che et al., 2017b; Cota et al., 2019; Ji, Wang, & Lee,
2013; Li et al., 2011; Li, Zhang, Leung, & Yang, 2016; Safarzadeh
& Niaki, 2019; Wang et al., 2018; Wang, Wang, & Lin, 2017; Yeh,
Chuang, & Lee, 2015), the total weighed job tardiness (Fang & Lin,
2013), the total completion time (Ding, Song, Zhang, Chiong, & Wu,
2016) and the number of used machines (Zeng, Che, & Wu, 2018).
Among these works, parallel machine scheduling problems under
the TOU tariffs are considered in Che et al. (2017b), Zeng et al.
(2018), Wang et al. (2018). Several approaches model the involved
bi-objective problem using a technique similar to the  -constraint
method, i.e., they solve a scalar optimization problem minimizing
a single objective having constrained the other objective not to exceed a ﬁxed upper bound. This is the strategy used in Li et al.
(2011), Ji et al. (2013), Yeh et al. (2015), Li et al. (2016), where an
upper bound for the consumed energy is ﬁxed. On the other hand,
solving a multi-objective optimization problems consists in determining the set of eﬃcient or Pareto optimal solutions (Branke, Deb,
Miettinen, & Slowiński, 2008). A solution x is Pareto optimal if it is
not dominated by a different solution, i.e., it does not exist a solution x whose objective values are all not worse than the ones
of x and at least one objective value is better than the one of x.
As solving multi-objective combinatorial problem is very often NPhard, the approaches proposed in the literature aim at identifying
a good approximation of the set of eﬃcient solutions (also called
Pareto front). In Wang et al. (2018), as well as in the present paper,
the  -constraint method is adopted. In both approaches, the upper
bound for the constrained objective (the makespan) is systematically varied in order to produce an estimation of the Pareto front.
Other green scheduling works exploit multi-objective metaheuristics, like genetic algorithms (May et al. (2015); Liu, Dong, Lohse,
and Petrovic (2016)), hybrid backtracking search algorithms (Lu,
Gao, Li, Pan, & Wang, 2017), particle swarm optimization (Tang,
Dai, Salido, & Giret, 2016), or hybrid grey wolf discrete optimization algorithms (Lu, Gao, Li, Zheng, & Gong, 2018).

418

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

3. Problem statement
The considered problem consists in scheduling N independent
jobs on M identical parallel machines. All jobs are available for
processing (no release time is considered), and each machine can
process only a job at a time. Let J = {1, . . . , N} be the set of jobs,
and H = {1, . . . , M} be the set of machines. For each job j ∈ J, the
processing time pj is identical for all the machines and it is assumed equal to an integer number of time slots. The jobs must be
scheduled in a time horizon consisting of a set T = {1, . . . , K } of
time slots. Jobs cannot be preempted, i.e., each job j must be processed in a set Sj of pj consecutive time slots on a single machine
h ∈ H. Due to the TOU energy costs, the time slots in T are grouped
into time intervals, each including a sequence of time slots characterized by the same energy price. Namely, a given energy price
ct is assigned to each time slot t ∈ T. Each machine h ∈ H is associated with a ﬁxed energy consumption rate eh , and the energy
consumption cost associated with the processing of job j on h is

eh · t∈S ct . The completion time Cj of a job j is the last time slot
j

assigned to such job. Furthermore, the makespan Cmax of a schedule is the maximum among the completion times of the jobs in
J, i.e., C max = max{C j : j ∈ J}. The value of TEC associated with a



schedule is deﬁned as
h∈H eh
j∈J
k∈S ck , where Jh is the set
h

j

of jobs scheduled on machine h. Finally, the problem is to assign
and sequence the jobs on the machines, determining the starting
time of each job while minimizing Cmax and TEC at the same time.
This problem can be formulated as a mixed integer programming
problem as follows.

Makespan and TEC are the objective functions minimized in
(1) and (2), respectively. Eq. (3) deﬁnes TEC. Constraints (4) impose that each job is assigned to a single machine, ensuring that
the processing of any job starts in a single slot on a single machine.
Constraints (5) guarantee that at most a single job is processed in
each time slot on each machine. Eqs. (6) provide the completion
time of the jobs, implicitly imposing the non-preemption. Constraints (7) deﬁne the makespan, whereas (8) imposes that the
makespan must not exceed the available time horizon; note that,
due to (8), the problem may not be solvable if K is not suﬃciently
large. Finally, (9) and (10) give the variable deﬁnitions. It is worth
noting that the above model differs from the one in Wang et al.
(2018), since the latter does not guarantee the non-overlapping of
jobs for some instances of the problem.
4. The scheduling approach
In this section, a new scheduling algorithm, called Split-Greedy
Scheduler (SGS), is introduced. Such algorithm is based on a new
heuristic that we called Split-Greedy Heuristic (SGH), designed in
order to enhance and reﬁne CH (Wang et al., 2018). A novel adhoc local search, called Exchange Search (ES), is also described. The
scheduling algorithm which employs SGH for ﬁnding solutions, and
ES to improve them, is called SGS-ES. Both SGS and SGS-ES are
detailed in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. Moreover, the improvements that
our approach entails with respect to CH (Wang et al., 2018) are
discussed in depth.
4.1. The Split-Greedy Heuristic

Variables.
Xjht ∈ {0, 1}, j ∈ J, h ∈ H, t ∈ T, equal to 1 if job j is processed
on machine h starting in slot t, 0 otherwise;
• C ≥ 0, j ∈ J, completion time of job j;
j
• Cmax ≥ 0 makespan;
• TEC ≥ 0 total energy consumption.

First, it is necessary to introduce some deﬁnitions regarding
time slots and jobs.

Formulation.

We call location a pair l = (h, F ), with h ∈ H and F⊆T. We also
denote as ECl the energy cost eh ·  t ∈ F ct of l.

•

min C max

(1)

min T EC

(2)

subject to

T EC =



eh

h∈H
j +1
 K−p


h∈H

j +1
 K−p


t+ p −1 
X jht

j


X jht = 1

(3)

i=t

t=1

j∈I

ci

j∈J

(4)

t=1



t


X jhi ≤ 1 t ∈ T , h ∈ H

Deﬁnition 4.1. Two slots t and t + k on the same machine are said
free-consecutive if they are both free and all the slots in [t + 1, t +
k − 1] are occupied.

Deﬁnition 4.2. A free location for a job j is a location (h, F) such
that F contains only free adjacent and/or free-consecutive slots on
machine h, and |F | = p j .
In Fig. 4.1 we report an example of 6 slots on a machine h
where a single job j with p j = 2 is scheduled. Slots 2 and 5 are
free-consecutive slots on h. Considering a job j with p j = 2, then
the location (h, F), with F = {2, 5}, is a free location for j on h.
Note that assigning this location to j does not produce a feasible
schedule since j is preempted.

(5)

j∈J i=max{0,t−p j +1}

Cj =

j +1
 K−p


h∈H

C max ≥ C j

(t + p j − 1 )X jht

j∈J

(6)
Fig. 4.1. An example of free-consecutive slots.

t=1

j∈J

C max ≤ K
T EC ≥ 0, C max ≥ 0, C j ≥ 0
X jht ∈ {0, 1}

(7)

Deﬁnition 4.3. The assigned location of a job j is a location (h, Aj ),
where Aj is the set of adjacent slots assigned to j and |A j | = p j .

(8)

If a job j has an assigned location (h, Aj ), its start time sj is
mint∈A j {t }. Note that, in the example of Fig. 4.1, (h, {3, 4}) is the
location assigned to job j.

j∈J

(9)

j ∈ J, h ∈ H, t ∈ T

(10)

Deﬁnition 4.4. A feasible schedule S = {(h, A j ), j ∈ J : h ∈ H, A j ⊆
T } is a set of assigned locations such that for all (h, Aj ) and (h, A j ),
A j ∩ A j = ∅ if j = j .

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

419

Fig. 4.2. (a) the partial schedule generated by CH for Example 4.1; (b) a feasible schedule for the same example.

Deﬁnition 4.4 states that in a feasible schedule, each job is assigned to a set of adjacent slots on a machine, and that the nonoverlapping condition for the jobs assigned to the same machine
is satisﬁed, i.e., any two assigned locations on the same machine
must have no common time slots. If (h, Aj ) is an assigned location,
with j ∈ J, Aj ⊆T, and such location satisﬁes the non-overlapping
condition on h, then j is said feasibly scheduled.
In order to generate the best approximation of the Pareto front,
both CH and SGS iterate a scheduling construction procedure. For
the sake of clarity and completeness, CH is brieﬂy summarized in
the following. Note that we also include the local search procedure
(step 4) introduced in Wang et al. (2018), since this whole algorithm is referred as CH in the experimental tests reported in Wang
et al. (2018).
1. The jobs are sorted according to the longest processing time
(LPT) rule in non-increasing order of processing times;
2. The lower bound for the makespan is deﬁned as K min =

ˆ
j∈J p j /M, the current maximum accepted makespan K is
ﬁxed to the time horizon K of the problem, and the set of
found solutions Ns is initialized to ∅;
3. For each job j, among the set L of free locations for j, which
includes only free adjacent slots, lmin such that ECl min =
min{ECl , l ∈ L} is determined and assigned to j (breaking ties
by choosing the earliest start time among free locations with
equal energy consumption cost);
4. A local search that tries to improve TEC without worsening
the makespan by shifting blocks of contiguous jobs on each
machine is applied;
5. The makespan Cmax and TEC of the obtained solution are
computed, the solution is added to Ns , the current accepted
makespan is updated as Kˆ = C max − 1, and the algorithm is
iterated to step 3 provided that Kˆ ≥ K min ;
6. The set of the non-dominated solutions of Ns is returned.
Since no information is given about the strategy used to break
ties in step 1, we assume that they are randomly broken. The
ﬁrst improvement introduced by SGS is the use of a more appropriate lower bound for the maximum accepted makespan, i.e.,

ˆ
K min = max{
j∈J p j /M , max j∈J { p j }}. For each ﬁxed K , both CH
and SGS iteratively construct a solution by assigning each job to
one of the available locations, which, in the case of CH, corresponds only to free adjacent slots. However, from the description
presented in Wang et al. (2018), CH may not be able to build feasible schedules, even if a feasible schedule exists, when no location
including only free adjacent slots is available for a job due to the
previous assignments. This behaviour is highlighted in Example 4.1.
Example 4.1. Consider machines h and h , with unitary energy
consumption eh = 1 and eh = 2, and a set J = { j (i ) , i = 1, .., 6} of
jobs, with p j = 2 for each j ∈ J. The time horizon K is 7, and the
energy prices of each time interval are 100, 1, 1, 100, 1, 1, 100,
as shown in Fig. 4.2. Since all the jobs have the same processing
time, CH considers the jobs in J in a random order. For simplicity,
in Fig. 4.2 we assume that such jobs are sorted according to the
non-decreasing order of their indices. Then, CH assigns the ﬁrst
four jobs j(1) , j(2) , j(3) and j(4) to locations (h, {1, 2}), (h, {4, 5}),

(h , {1, 2}) and (h , {4, 5}) respectively, since such locations have
the same energy cost. As an example, Fig. 4.2(a) highlights one
among the possible alternative assignments of these jobs. However, Fig. 4.2(a) also shows that there is no valid location left for
j(5) and j(6) . Hence, since CH does not handle such kind of situations, it returns a partial (i.e., not feasible) schedule. However, a
feasible schedule exists for this example, since the available slots
on the two machines are suﬃcient to process all the 6 jobs with a
different assignment, as shown in Fig. 4.2(b).
In order to overcome this issue, SGS can temporarily assign the
jobs to free locations that, according to Deﬁnition 4.2, may include free-consecutive slots. Then, it can produce feasible schedules by exploiting an approach based on the theoretic framework
described in the following.
Deﬁnition 4.5. A split-location is a location including at least two
free-consecutive slots. A split-location is said free for a job j if it
is also a free location for j. A split-location (h, A) is denoted as
assigned if there exists a job j ∈ J such that all the slots in A are
assigned to j.
A job assigned to a split-location l is said split-scheduled in l.
Note that the set of all the free locations for a job j contains the
set of all the free split-locations for such job. Fig. 4.3 shows an
example of a split-location assigned to job j, where slots 1 and 2
are adjacent, while 2 and 6 are free-consecutive slots. In addition,
Fig. 4.3 features a split-schedule, which is deﬁned in the following.

Fig. 4.3. An example of assigned split-location of a job j.

Deﬁnition 4.6. A split-schedule S = {(h, I j ), j ∈ J : h ∈ H, I j ⊆ T } is a
set of assigned locations and split-locations such that, for all (h, Ii )
and (h, Ij ) assigned to i, j ∈ J, then Ii ∩ I j = ∅ if i = j.
Compared to Deﬁnition 4.4, Deﬁnition 4.6 states that in a splitschedule at least one job is assigned to a split-location. Hence,
split-schedules are not feasible and they are a subset of preemptive schedules. Fig. 4.4 highlights the difference between these two
types of schedules. Fig. 4.4(a) shows a split-schedule with a splitscheduled job j(1) , whereas Fig. 4.4(b) shows a schedule with a preempted job j(2) ; such job is not split-scheduled since slots 2 and 6
are not free-consecutive because slot 5 is free.
Deﬁnition 4.7. A feasible schedule (or split-schedule) S is said
equivalent to a feasible schedule (or split-schedule) S if C max (S ) =
C max (S ) and T EC (S ) = T EC (S ).
Deﬁnition 4.8. A split-schedule block B of a split-schedule S is a
set of assigned locations and split-locations (h, Gj ) on a machine

h for a subset of jobs j ∈ J ⊆J, such that
j∈J  G j corresponds to a
subset {t (i ) , t (i+1 ) , . . . , t (i+b) } of assigned adjacent slots on h, and
slots t (i−1 ) and t (i+b+1 ) , if exist, are free.

420

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

Fig. 4.4. An example of split-schedule (a) and preemptive schedule (b).

Deﬁnition 4.9. A feasible schedule block B of a feasible schedule
S is a set of assigned locations (h, Gj ) on a machine h for a subset of jobs j ∈ J ⊆J, associated with a set of assigned adjacent slots
{t (i) , t (i+1) , . . . , t (i+b) } on h such that slots t (i−1) and t (i+b+1) , if exist, are free.
Namely, a split-schedule block corresponds to a set of consecutive time slots, all assigned to jobs that are split-scheduled in
the block. An example of split-schedule block and feasible schedule block is given in Fig. 4.5. Note that a split-schedule block is a
split-schedule itself (i.e., if a job is assigned to a time slot in the
split-schedule block, then the same job is completely processed in
the block). The following theorem is essential to the formulation
of SGH.

Algorithm 4.1 Convert Schedule
A set J = {1, ..., N} of jobs, with processing time p j , j ∈ J.
A set H = {1, ..., M} of machines.
A set T = {1, ..., K max } of time slots.
A split-schedule S = {Sh , h ∈ H }, a collection of sets of
locations.
Output A feasible schedule S equivalent to S.
Input

1: S ← {S , h ∈ H }, a collection of empty sets S = ∅, h ∈ H
h

2: for each h ∈ H do
3:
4:
5:
6:

h

s ← 0 and p ← 0
while it exists a job j such that sˆ j = min{si : i ∈ J, (h, Ii ) ∈
Sh , si > s} do
sj ← max(s + p, sˆ j )
//The actual start time of j in the
converted schedule
Ij ← {sj , sj + 1, ..., sj + p j − 1}; l  ← (h, Ij )

Reassign j to l  by adding l  to Sh
s ← sˆ j and p ← p j
9:
end while
10: end for
11: return S
7:

8:

Fig. 4.5. An example of split-schedule block and feasible schedule block: slots 36 in (a) are a split-schedule block including jobs j(1) and j(2) , whereas in (b) are a
feasible schedule block for the same two jobs.

Theorem 4.1. Any split-schedule S can be converted into an equivalent feasible schedule S .
Proof. Since the schedules on each machine are independent, it is
suﬃcient to consider the schedule Sh on each machine h ∈ H separately. In general, a split-schedule Sh on a machine can be partitioned into b split-schedule blocks Bi , i = 1, . . . , b. We note that no
permutation of time slots in Bi may affect the makespan or TEC of
S, since such time slots are all assigned to jobs. Hence, in order to
prove the theorem, it is suﬃcient to observe that a block Bi can be
converted into an equivalent feasible schedule block by selecting a
permutation of the time slots in Bi such that each job is assigned
to adjacent slots in the block. 
Therefore, Theorem 4.1 ensures the possibility of converting any
split-schedule into an equivalent feasible schedule. A procedure
performing this task, essential to both SGH and ES, is shown in
Algorithm 4.1. Among the alternative equivalent feasible schedules
that can be obtained from a split-schedule S, Algorithm 4.1 generates the one that, on each machine, schedules the jobs with the
same sequence of jobs in S in a feasible way, so that each job starts
as soon as possible, but not earlier than its start slot in S. As detailed in the remainder of Section 4.1, Algorithm 4.1 eﬃciently generates an equivalent feasible schedule, since it considers each job,
and possibly reschedules it at most once. More importantly, the
computational complexity of Algorithm 4.1 does not affect the one
of SGH (Algorithm 4.2), which is the only presented algorithm directly employing Algorithm 4.1 as a subroutine, as shown later in
this section.
For each machine, Algorithm 4.1 performs two main steps: (1)
it considers the time intervals in non-decreasing order to deter-

mine the starting time sj of each job j (loop in lines 4 − 9), and
(2) as soon as the starting time of a job j is identiﬁed, it assigns
j to pj consecutive time slots, starting from the ﬁrst available slot
greater than or equal to sj (lines 5 − 7). In order to improve the
computational eﬃciency of SGS-ES, all the algorithms presented in
Section 4 employ Left-Leaning Red-Black (LLRB) trees (Sedgewick
& Wayne, 2011) to represent schedules. LLRBs are based on RedBlack trees (Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, & Stein, 2009), a type of
self-balancing binary search trees. In this way, a schedule is stored
as a set of LLRBs, each one associated with a single machine. Each
LLRB stores the start times of the jobs as the keys of the tree, augmenting each node with the location of the related job as additional information. In our implementation, schedules S and S in
Algorithm 4.1 are represented accordingly.
As regards the complexity of Algorithm 4.1, for each h ∈ H, lines
4 − 9 are executed O() times, with  = min(N, K max ), since the
maximum number of jobs scheduled on a machine is N, and it is
upper bounded by the makespan Kmax . Lines 3 and 5 both take
O(1). The extraction of the entry with the lowest key among the
ones with keys greater than a given one from a LLRB (line 4) consisting of n elements is O(log2 n). The insertion operation on a LLRB
(line 7) has the same computational complexity. Therefore, lines 4
and 7 have a O(log2 ) complexity.
In pseudocode, line 6 is stated consistently with the notation
of locations introduced earlier in this section. However, since the
assigned slots are always sequential, line 6 can easily be implemented to store only the starting time sj and the ending time
s j + p j − 1 of each job j. Therefore, the complexity of line 6 is considered to be O(1). Since lines 2 − 10 are executed M times, the
worst-case complexity of Algorithm 4.1 is O(M ·  · log2 ).
The pseudocode of SGH is introduced in Algorithm 4.2. For
a ﬁxed value Kmax , SGH, similarly to CH, constructively builds a
schedule for the given set of jobs constrained to a maximum
makespan equal to Kmax . However, compared to CH, SGH (1) returns no feasible solution if Kmax is too tight to schedule all the

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

Algorithm 4.2 Split-Greedy Heuristic (SGH)
A set J = {1, ..., N} of jobs, with processing time p j , j ∈ J.
A set H = {1, ..., M} of machines, with unitary energy
consumption rate eh , h ∈ H.
A set T = {1, ..., K max } of time slots, with energy price
ck , k ∈ T , where K max is the maximum allowed makespan.
Output A feasible schedule of the N jobs in the K max time slots
on the M machines, if it exists; otherwise, an empty
schedule.
Input

1: S ← {Sh , h ∈ H }, a collection of empty sets Sh = ∅, h ∈ H

2: Build a list Pˆ out of the elements in PJ , and sort Pˆ in non-

increasing order

3: Build a map F : PJ → P (J ), with P (J ) power set of J, and ∀ p ∈ PJ ,

F ( p) ← { j ∈ J : p j = p}

4: for each p ∈ Pˆ do
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:

for each h ∈ H do
Build a list L ph of the alternative free locations with least
energy cost on h for any j, p j = p
end for
for each j ∈ F ( p) do
if L ph = ∅ ∀h ∈ H then return ∅
//Return no feasible
solution (no free location for j)
Remove a least-cost, randomly chosen location (hˆ , Iˆ)

from
L , and denote it as lˆ
h∈H

ph

Assign location lˆ to job j, and then insert lˆ in Shˆ
Remove any location or split-location (hˆ , I ) such that
I ∩ Iˆ = ∅ from L ˆ

11:
12:

ph

Add any split-location (hˆ , I ) with |I | = p (produced by
the assignment of lˆ to j) to L phˆ

13:

14:

end for

15: end for
16: if S is a split-schedule then
17:

Convert schedule S with Algorithm 4.1

18: end if
19: return S

jobs (line 9); (2) it temporarily allows the generation of splitschedule blocks while scheduling the jobs; (3) it ﬁnally converts
any split-schedule obtained by such construction into an equivalent feasible one using Algorithm 4.1. As in Algorithm 4.1, S is
initialized as a set of empty LLRBs in O(M) time. We denote the
set {pj : j ∈ J} of distinct processing times of the jobs in J as PJ . In
line 3, SGH partitions J into subsets of jobs F(p) with the same
processing time p. The computational complexity for lines 2 − 3
is O(|PJ | · log2 |PJ | + N ), since line 2 requires sorting Pˆ and line 3
builds F with the jobs in J. In lines 4 − 15, SGH iterates the assignment of the jobs in the subsets F(p), p ∈ PJ , according to the
LPT rule. For each machine h ∈ H, SGH builds the list Lph of all the
available, free (possibly split-) locations on h with the least energy
consumption cost for the jobs with processing time p (lines 5 − 7).
This operation is carried out over the time slots by advancing a
pointer until Kmax is reached. A queue with maximum capacity p
is employed to store the free slots reached by the pointer. As soon
as a free slot t is found, it is enqueued until the maximum capacity is reached. When this happens, a new free (possibly split) location is identiﬁed. The start and the end time of such location are respectively equal to the oldest and the most recent elements in the queue. Then, whenever a new free slot t is found, the
oldest element in the queue is dequeued and t is enqueued, progressively identifying new locations. Since the maximum number
of jobs scheduled on each machine is , querying the job scheduled in each slot, which consists in retrieving an element in a LLRB,
requires O(log2 ). However, we can improve this complexity by

421

implementing SGH with an additional auxiliary table that stores
information on the scheduled jobs. At any time of the execution
of SGH, each entry (m, t) of this table stores the end time of the
job with start time t scheduled on machine m, if such jobs exists;
otherwise, a null value is stored.
This table can be easily initialized at the beginning of the procedure in O(M · Kmax ). If the entry (m, t) is null, the slot t is not
the start time of a job; otherwise, assume that j is the job scheduled on m with start time t. Then, the ending slot of j (which, if
j is split-scheduled, is greater than s j + p j − 1) is given by the entry (m, t). This information can be queried in O(1), and it can be
used to skip already assigned jobs. Therefore, lines 5 − 7 have a
O(M · Kmax ) computational complexity, and are executed for a total number of O(|PJ |) times. Note that the computation of the energy consumption cost of each location does not impact the overall complexity, since it is carried out by adding (subtracting) the
energy cost of enqueued (dequeued) slots in O(1) while advancing over them. Line 9 evaluates the possibility of scheduling j by
verifying in O(M) time that at least a free location is available for
j. In the opposite case, an empty schedule is returned. In line 10,
we implemented an uniformly random selection among the possible least-cost locations for j in O(M) time. We observed that this
random choice produced better values of TEC compared to a deterministic choice that instead favours the earliest starting location.
The machines containing the least cost locations are ﬁrst identiﬁed
in O(M). Let us denote the set of such machines as H . Then, we

can partition the range [0, h∈H  |L ph |] according to the number of
locations, i.e. |Lph |, on each h ∈ H . In this way, a random number

r ∼ U[0, h∈H  |L ph |], followed by an O(M) manipulation of it, de
termines the exact position of a location in h∈H  L ph . In this way,
we can avoid explicitly performing the union operation reported
in line 10, which has a O(M · Kmax ) worst case complexity. Line 11
updates Shˆ by inserting the new location lˆ, and since the number
of locations in Shˆ are O(), the complexity of line 11 is O(log2 ).
After lˆ is assigned to j in line 11, some slots become assigned, possibly affecting previously free locations, and even generating new
ones. The list L phˆ is updated accordingly (lines 12 − 13) in O(Kmax )

time (see the analysis of lines 5 − 7). Finally, if the resulting schedule S is a split-schedule, it is converted into a feasible one in line
17 with Algorithm 4.1 in O(M ·  · log2 ). Therefore, the complexity of Algorithm 4.2 is O(M + |PJ | · log2 |PJ | + N ) + O(|PJ | · M · K max ) +
O(N · M ) + O(M ·  · log2 ) + O(N · K max ) + O(M ·  · log2 ). Each
of the terms of the sum respectively corresponds to the complexity
of lines 1 − 3, 5 − 7, 9 − 10, 11, 12 − 13, and 16 − 18, within the
execution of SGH. The complexity of Algorithm 4.2 can be more
compactly expressed as O(|PJ | · log2 |PJ | + N · K max + M · ( · log2  +
|PJ | · K max + N )).
4.2. Exchange Search
The performance of SGH is further improved with an ad-hoc
designed local search procedure called Exchange Search. ES, starting from a feasible schedule S, changes the assignment of subsets
of scheduled jobs to the machines in order to improve TEC, without worsening Cmax and in some cases also possibly improving it.
In order to describe ES, we state the following deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 4.10. An exchangeable period sequence (EPS) is a subset
E of adjacent time slots on a given machine h in a feasible schedule
S such that, if a time slot in E is assigned to a job j scheduled on
h, then all the slots assigned to j are in E.
Fig. 4.6 provides an example to clarify the deﬁnition of EPS. The
subset of time slots E1 in Fig. 4.6(a) represents an EPS with cardinality equal to 5, since it contains jobs entirely scheduled in E1 and
an idle time slot. Differently, in Fig. 4.6(b), E2 is not an EPS, since

422

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

Fig. 4.6. Examples of sets of time slots that are (a) and not are (b) EPS.

job j(0) is not completely scheduled within E2 . Note that not all the
time slots in an EPS are necessarily assigned to a job. In addition,
according to Deﬁnition 4.10, both free and assigned locations are
EPS’s.
Deﬁnition 4.11. In a feasible schedule S, given two EPS’s E and
E , with |E | = |E  |, belonging to machines h and h , and such that
E ∩ E  = ∅ if h = h , an EPS swap of E and E is a procedure that
schedules in E (E) all the jobs scheduled in E (E ), without changing the relative assignment of such jobs to the slots in E (E ).
Fig. 4.7 (a)–(b) gives an example of EPS swap involving job j(0)
assigned to EPS E1 on machine h and the jobs j(1) and j(2) assigned
to EPS E2 on machine h . EPS swaps do not affect the feasibility of a
schedule since the jobs involved in a swap are completely assigned
to the slots in the swapped EPS. In the following, we introduce the
deﬁnition of rearrangement of an EPS.

ing to a ﬁrst improvement policy which considers only TEC, without worsening makespan. In particular, the set of EPS-Js is considered in non-increasing order of their cardinality, and the evaluated swaps only involve an EPS-J and an EPS-I. The performed
swaps are followed by a rearrangement of the jobs ﬁnally assigned
to the slots in the involved EPS-J. To this end, SGH is easily generalized to reschedule the subset of jobs in an EPS-J (or an EPSI), i.e., to operate on subsets J ⊆J, H ⊆H, and T ⊆T, with |H  | = 1.
Since a single job is scheduled in an EPS-J, at most pmax jobs can
be scheduled in an EPS-I, and the number of different processing times of the jobs scheduled in an EPS-J or an EPS-I is upper
bounded by pmax , then |PJ | ≤ pmax and |J | ≤ pmax . Therefore, the
computational complexity of this modiﬁed procedure, denoted as
generalized SGH, is O(|PJ | · log2 |PJ | + |J  | · pmax + |J  | · log2  + |PJ | ·
pmax + |J  | ) = O( p2max + pmax · log2 ). Note that such expression directly derives from the considerations on the computational complexity of SGH done at the end of Section 4.1. In fact, generalized
SGH builds the list of free locations with O(pmax ) complexity for
each of the O(pmax ) processing times, it updates such list with the
same complexity for each of the O(pmax ) jobs, and it reschedules
a subset of such jobs updating the schedule S by inserting each
location in O(log2 ) time.
J
Given a feasible schedule S, we deﬁne E p (S ) and E Ip (S ) respectively as the sets of EPS-Js and EPS-Is of cardinality p ∈ PJ in S. We
also introduce two sets of maps that allow to associate a time slot
k on a machine h with an EPS E on the same machine, and such
J
that the ﬁrst slot of E is k. Formally, we denote as M p (S ) : H × T →
J

J

E p (S ) ∪ ∅, p ∈ PJ , the maps that, for each E ∈ E p (S ) on a machine h,

associates (h, mint  ∈E {t  } ) with E. The maps M p (S ) also associate
any (h, t) with the empty EPS when there is no EPS-J E on machine h, with cardinality p, and having its ﬁrst slot mint  ∈E {t  } equal
to t. Similarly, we denote as MIp (S ) : H × T → E Ip (S ) ∪ ∅ the analogous maps for the EPS-Is. Finally, we deﬁne EJ (S) and EI (S) respecJ
tively as the two collections of sets {E p (S ) : p ∈ PJ } and {E Ip (S ) : p ∈
J

Fig. 4.7. An example of EPS swap.

Deﬁnition 4.12. Consider an EPS E in a feasible schedule S, and let
JE (S) be the set of the jobs scheduled in E. A rearrangement of E
with respect to S is a procedure which reassigns the slots in E to
all the jobs in JE (S) considering only free adjacent slots so that all
the jobs are feasibly scheduled.
In other words, in general, a rearrangement of E produces feasible schedule blocks that may differ from the ones previously
present in E (e.g., see Fig. 4.8).
With Deﬁnition 4.12, we can now state that, given a feasible
schedule S, any rearrangement of an EPS of S yields a feasible
schedule S , which is trivial to prove.
In the following, in order to better describe ES, we denote an
EPS which contains only slots assigned to a single job as an EPS-J,
and an EPS with cardinality not exceeding pmax , which includes at
least one idle slot, as an EPS-I, where pmax = max p∈PJ { p}. Starting
from a feasible schedule, ES explores a neighborhood generated by
a subset of EPS swaps, updating the current best solution accord-

PJ }; similarly, we deﬁne MJ (S ) and MI (S ) as {M p (S ) : p ∈ PJ } and
{MIp (S ) : p ∈ PJ }, respectively. From now on, the dependence on S
is omitted whenever it is obvious from the context.
The pseudocode of ES is shown in Algorithm 4.3. ES employs the subroutines GenerateEPS, EvaluateSwapRearrange, and UpdateEPS, which are not reported in pseudocode and are instead
only described for the sake of brevity. In this way, we omit implementation details that are neither relevant to the analysis of
the computational complexity, nor essential to the completeness
of the presentation. It is important to note that, in the subroutines,
the computation of energy consumption cost related to sequential
slots has been speeded up by computing and storing the cumula
tive energy prices μth , t = 1, . . . , K max , h ∈ H, with μth = eh · ti=1 ci
in O(M · Kmax ) before the execution of ES. We also set μ0h = 0 for
any h ∈ H. In this way, the energy consumption cost of any lo-

Fig. 4.8. An example of a valid EPS rearrangement.

J

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

Algorithm 4.3 Exchange-Search (ES)
A set J = {1, . . . , N} of jobs, with processing time p j , j ∈ J.
A set H = {1, . . . , M} of machines, with unitary energy
consumption rate eh , h ∈ H.
A set T = {1, . . . , K max } of time slots, with energy price
ck , k ∈ T , where K max is the maximum allowed makespan.
A split-schedule S as {Lh , h ∈ H }, a collection of sets of
locations.
Output A new feasible schedule.
Input

1: E J , E I ← GenerateEP S (S, H, T , PJ )

2: for each p ∈ PJ do
3:

J

J

Build the maps M p : H × T → E p and MIp : H × T → E Ip

4: end for

5: MJ ← {M p , p ∈ PJ }; MI ← {MIp , p ∈ PJ }
J

6: Build a list Pˆ out of the elements in PJ , and sort Pˆ in non-

increasing order
7: repeat

423

and the EPS-Is including slots in Tˆ on any machines h ∈ Hˆ . The
identiﬁcation of an EPS in a schedule is conceptually similar to
the task of ﬁnding free locations done in line 6 of Algorithm 4.2.
In particular, for any p ∈ PJ and h ∈ Hˆ , two pointers, one for the
head s of each EPS and the other for its tail e, are advanced
through the slots in Tˆ until maxt∈Tˆ t is reached. By deﬁnition of
EPS, e − s + 1 = p, and in order for the slots in [s, e] to qualify as
an EPS-I (or EPS-J), s must be free, or be the start time of a job,
and e must be free, or be the end time of a job. If these conditions hold, the slots in [s, e] are contained in an EPS. In particular,
such EPS is an EPS-J if and only if all the slots in [s, e] are assigned to a single job; otherwise, if the slots are not all assigned,
such EPS is an EPS-I. Checking these conditions requires multiple
queries to the LLRBs used to represent schedules, which yield a
worst-case O(log2 ) complexity for each of such queries. In fact,
each query is carried out at most twice for each t ∈ Tˆ , one when
the head pointer reaches t, and one when the tail pointer does.
As a side, but signiﬁcant, implementation note, given an EPS E
on a machine h containing slots {ti , ti+1 , ..., ti+ p−1 }, the actual im-

Improvement ← f alse
J
for each p ∈ Pˆ do
plementation of M p and MIp associates the key K max · h + ti to E.
J
for each ((hg , sg ), g) ∈ M p do
10:
This allows to uniquely address each EPS by its ﬁrst slot. In orfor each ((hl , sl ), l ) ∈ MIp do
11:
der for EvaluateSwapRearrange not to evaluate moves that cannot
S, δ ← EvaluateSwapRearrange(S, g, l )
12:
lead to an improvement of TEC, along with each EPS E, GenerateEPS
if δ < 0 then
13:
stores two additional information: the number of the assigned
E J , E I ,MJ ,MI← UpdateEPS(S, E J , E I ,MJ , MI , hg , Ig , PJ ) slots in E and the cumulative energy consumption cost of the list
14:
E J , E I ,MJ ,MI← UpdateEPS(S, E J , E I ,MJ , MI , hl , Il , PJ ) of slots contained in E, sorted by energy cost in non-decreasing
15:
Improvement ← true
16:
order. Therefore, the computational complexity of GenerateEPS is
break
17:
O(|PJ | · |Hˆ | · |Tˆ | · max(log2 , pmax · log2 ( pmax )). Note that the term
18:
end if
max(log2 , pmax · log2 (pmax )) is due to the fact that the cost of the
end for
19:
innermost loop is dominated by the maximum between the cost
end for
20:
of the queries on the LLRB and the cost of sorting the slots of the
21:
end for
identiﬁed EPS’s.
22: until Improvement
EvaluateSwapRearrange accepts a schedule S, an EPS-I E(0) , and
23: return S
an EPS-J E(1) of the same cardinality p, and evaluates the impact on TEC due to a move involving them. The procedure exploits the additional information stored with each EPS by GenerateEPS for pruning an EPS move if it does not entail an imcation l starting at slot t, and enclosing p time slots, deﬁned as
provement in TEC. Formally, consider an EPS E on machine hE
Ct ,t + p−1,h := μt+ p−1,h − μt−1,h , can be computed in O(1). Moreover,
consisting of the time slots IE , and denote with IEs the list of all
for the sake of compactness in the following explanations, we dethe time slots in E, sorted according to their energy cost in nonnote an EPS swap followed by a rearrangement of the involved
decreasing order. If IE (1) = {ti , ti+1 , ..., ti+ p−1 }, we denote Is (1) as
E
EPS’s as an EPS move.
(tis , tis+1 , ..., tis+ p−1 ). We also denote as ECE (0) (S ) the energy cost asWe ﬁrst present an overview of the subroutines and their use
sociated with E(0) in the schedule S. We omit the dependence on
in Algorithm 4.3, providing details of the implementations and the
S when it is clear from the context, and with a little abuse of noanalysis of the computational complexity later in this section. Gentation we deﬁne ECE (0) E (1) := ECE (0) + ECE (1) . Moreover, we denote
erateEPS identiﬁes all the EPS-Js and the EPS-Is in a feasible schedthe energy cost associated with E if all of its slots were assigned
ule S, exploiting LLRBs and cumulative energy costs. This procedure

as ECEmax = ehE k∈IE ck . Clearly, the number of assigned slots in E is
is directly invoked at the beginning of Algorithm 4.3 to allow the

α (JE ) := j∈JE p j . Therefore, a move involving E(0) and E(1) would
computation of the maps MJ and MI . In this way, Algorithm 4.3 is
lb
able to evaluate EPS moves with EvaluateSwapRearrange in the
ˆ E (0 ) E (1 ) =
result in an energy cost which is lower bounded by EC
main loop of the algorithm. In particular, Algorithm 4.3 repeatmax
EC (0) + Ct s ,t s +α (J )−1,h . The ﬁrst term is due to the fact that, if
E
i i
E (0 )
edly iterates over each EPS-J until no move involving an EPS-J and
the move is performed, the only job in the EPS-J E(1) is schedany EPS-I can improve TEC. EvaluateSwapRearrange eﬃciently evaluled in the entire EPS-I E(0) . The second term is instead related to
uates if an EPS move entails an improvement in TEC disregarding
the fact that if α (JE (0) ) slots are assigned in E(0) , then the energy
some of the moves that cannot lead to improvement by exploitconsumption cost associated with E(1) after the move is at least
ing a pruning condition. If the considered EPS move improves TEC,
lb
J
I
it is performed, and the maps M and M are updated accordˆ E (0) E (1) is not less than
the sum of its α (JE (0) ) least cost slots. If EC
ingly by UpdateEPS. Invoked twice for each performed EPS move,
ECE (0) E (1) , then this move cannot entail an improvement in TEC.
lb
UpdateEPS modiﬁes the representations of the maps MJ and MI ,
Therefore, the move is not performed, and ECE (0) E (1) − EˆC E (0) E (1) is
which may become inconsistent with S after an EPS move. Note
returned. Otherwise, the move is performed by scheduling the jobs
that UpdateEPS performs the needed changes invoking GenerateEPS
in JE (0) with the generalized SGH, yielding a schedule Sˆ, and an ento identify EPS’s. We now delve into a formal and more detailed
ˆ (0) (1) for the swapped EPS’s. Afterwards, the move
ergy cost EC
E E
explanation of each subroutine.
is
rolled
back
only if it does not improve the current solution.
GenerateEPS accepts a feasible schedule S, the subsets Hˆ ⊆ H
Finally,
the
function
returns ECE (0) E (1) − EˆC E (0) E (1) . Clearly, a posiJ
ˆ
ˆ
and T ⊆ T , and PJ as parameters, producing the two sets E and
tive
return
value
signals
that a move has actually been performed
Eˆ I according to S so that they respectively contain all the EPS-Js
8:

9:

424

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

(without being rolled back). The computational complexity of EvaluateSwapRearrange is dominated by the one of generalized SGH,
which is invoked once for each of the two EPS’s involved. Therefore, the complexity of EvaluateSwapRearrange is O( p2max + pmax ·
log2 )).
UpdateEPS accepts a schedule S, the two sets EJ and EI , the
two maps MJ and MI , a machine hE , a slot subset IE , and PJ ,
and returns the updated sets of EPS’s and maps. This function iterates over each p ∈ PJ , and for each t ∈ [max{0, min t  ∈IE {t  − p +
1}}, min{K max − p + 1, max t  ∈IE {t  }}], removes the entry, if present,
J

associated with (hE , t) from both E p and E Ip . The total complexity of all the removal operations is O(|PJ | · pmax ). Afterwards, UpdateEPS invokes GenerateEPS with parameters S, {hE }, IE , and PJ .
Let us denote its return values as Eˆ I and Eˆ J . In order to add
the newfound EPS’s to the respective sets EI and EJ , the opJ
J
erations E Ip ∪ Eˆ Ip and E p ∪ Eˆ p are carried out for each p ∈ PJ in
O(|PJ | · pmax ) time. The maps MJ and MI are then updated accordingly, again in O(|PJ | · pmax ) time. Therefore, the complexity of UpdateEPS is O(|PJ | · pmax + |PJ | · pmax · max(log2 , pmax · log2 ( pmax )) =
O(|PJ | · pmax · max(log2 , pmax · log2 ( pmax ))). Note that this complexity is dominated by GenerateEPS.
As regards the computational complexity of Algorithm 4.3, line
1 employs the already discussed procedure GenerateEPS in order
to identify the EPS’s associated with the whole schedule. Then, for
each p ∈ PJ , lines 2 − 4 associate each key with the proper entry
J

of the maps M p and MIp . Since there is a total of M · Kmax keys,
then lines 2 − 4 take O(|PJ | · M · Kmax ) time. Afterwards, line 5 builds
MJ and MI according to their deﬁnition in O(|PJ |) time, and line 6
builds the list Pˆ as done in Algorithm 4.2 in O(|PJ | · log2 |PJ |) time.
Lines 7 − 22 are executed repeatedly, as long as they entail at least
an improving move. Each possible move involving any EPS-J and
any EPS-I is considered. Each of such moves is evaluated with EvaluateSwapRearrange, and if it is improving, it is performed. The lists
of EPS’s and the maps are updated with two calls to UpdateEPS.
Note that an EPS-J of cardinality p can be swapped (and then rearranged) with up to O(M · (K max − p + 1 )) EPS-Is. Therefore, since
there are N different EPS-Js, the maximum number of moves to be
evaluated is O(N · M · Kmax ). However, the exact number of moves,
which is dependent on the set of the EPS-Is in the schedule, varies
during the execution of ES. In particular, both J and the behaviour
of (generalized) SGH affect the set of EPS-Is. We can observe that

generally, the higher N and/or p∈PJ p, the lower is the number of

idle slots, hence the smaller is the set of EPS-Is. Moreover, not all
the possible ES moves are evaluated: the ﬁrst improvement policy
stops the evaluation of moves for an EPS-J E as soon as an improving move involving E is performed. In order to simplify the
analysis without losing generality, we suppose that lines 7 − 22
can be executed at most R times. As explained in the following,
this constant has a very small upper bound in practice. Since the
innermost loop of lines 7 − 22 always invokes EvaluateSwapRearrange once, and UpdateEPS at most twice, the computational complexity of ES is O(|PJ | · M · Kmax · max(log2 (Kmax ), pmax · log2 (pmax )) +
O(|PJ | · M · Kmax ) + O(|PJ | · log2 |PJ |) + O(R · N · M · K max · ( p2max + pmax ·
log2  + |PJ | · pmax · max(log2 (), pmax · log2 ( pmax ))). Each of the
terms of this sum respectively corresponds to the complexity of
GenerateEPS in line 1, of the construction of the maps in lines
2 − 4, of lines 5 − 6, and of the main loop in lines 7 − 22. Note that
the complexity of ES can be more compactly expressed as O(R · N ·
M · K max · p2max · log2 ( pmax ) · log2 ). The analysis of the worst-case
complexity of ES may suggest unpromising computational times.
However, the actual performance observed even for the largest
instance (M = 40, N = 500, K = 500, |PJ | ≤ 12, pmax ≤ 12 ) employed
in the experimental campaign reported in Section 5 is valuable. In
this connection, we also observed that R is at least an order of

magnitude lower than T. The detailed validation of the effectiveness of ES is provided by our experimental campaign reported in
Section 5.
Finally, LLRBs introduce an important optimization in EvaluateSwapRearrange. If each schedule is implemented as an ordered list, the computational complexity for scheduling each of the
O(pmax ) jobs in an EPS is O() instead of O(log2 ). In fact, in this
case, each of the job requires O(log2 ) for binary search to identify
the insertion point, and then O() time for shifting the elements
after the insertion point, degrading the performance with respect
to our implementation choice. This analysis completes the motivation for the introduction of LLRBs in the implementation.
A simple example is useful to illustrate and clarify the update
operations performed by ES. In this example, we simply denote
an EPS as a subset T ⊆T, without specifying the machine where
the EPS is located as it is clear from the context. In Fig. 4.9(a)
we consider a schedule for a single machine h with eh = 1. There
J
are two EPS-Js in E1 , one (E(1) ) including only the slot assigned
(1)
to j , and the other (E(2) ) including only the slot assigned to
J
j(2) ; moreover, there is an EPS-J (E(0) ) in E3 , including only the
(0)
slots assigned to j . As regards the EPS-Is, E1I = {{1, 5, 7, 9}}, E2I =
{{5, 6}, {6, 7}, {7, 8}, {8, 9}}, and E3I = {{5, 6, 7}, {6, 7, 8}, {7, 8, 9}}.
J

Let us consider the possible EPS moves for the only EPS in E3 ,
which we denote as E(a) , and ECE (a) = 12. We denote the three EPSs
{5, 6, 7}, {6, 7, 8}, and {7, 8, 9} in E3I as E(b) , E(c) , E(d) , respectively.
Therefore, ECE (b) = 4, ECE (c) = 8, and ECE (d ) = 4. Moreover, EC max
=
E (b )
max
15, EC max
(c ) = 13, and EC (d ) = 15. The cumulative energy costs for
E

E

E(a) are C2,2,h = 1, C2,3,h = 2, and C2,4,h = 12. All the three EPS-Is
in E3I satisfy the lower bound condition for a move involving any
of them and E(a) , since EC max
+ C2,2,h = 16, EC max
+ C2,3,h = 15, and
E (c )
E (b )
EC max
+
C
=
16
are
all
less
than ECE (0) + ECE (1) + ECE (2) . How2,2,h
(d )
E

ever, only the move involving E(0) and E(c) can actually decrease
the TEC from 20 to 15. The schedule after the execution of this
move is shown in Fig. 4.9(b).
Another example may be helpful in highlighting why ES can be
effective and thus improve the quality of the solutions. Fig. 4.10(a)
depicts a feasible schedule S, generated by SGH, for two machines
h and h , and six jobs j(0) , j(1) , j(2) , j(3) , j(4) and j(5) , with p j (0) = 3,
p j (1) = p j (2) = 2, and p j (3) = p j (4) = p j (5) = 1. The makespan and
TEC of schedule S shown in Fig. 4.10(a) are C max (S ) = 7 and
T EC (S ) = 145, respectively. Applying ES to S, only one improving
EPS move is identiﬁed and performed. In particular, the set of
slots {5, 6, 7} on machine h is an EPS-J including only j(0) that is
swapped with the EPS-I corresponding to the set of slots {1, 2, 3}
on machine h , which includes j(3) , j(4) and an idle slot. After the
swap, j(3) , j(4) are rearranged by SGH in the EPS-I {5, 6, 7} on machine h, and the resulting schedule S , with T EC (S ) = 114 < T EC (S )
is shown in Fig. 4.10(b). In addition, note that, due to the rearrangement, C max (S ) = 6 < C max (S ).
The SGS-ES algorithm (obtained combining Split-Greedy Heuristic with Exchange Search) is shown in Algorithm 4.4.
Similarly to CH, SGS-ES iterates over all the possible values for
the schedule makespan. At each iteration, it imposes a value Kˆ
for the maximum makespan, and then it tries to build a feasible
schedule for the given jobs by means of SGH, constrained to a time
horizon not greater than Kˆ . If SGH returns a feasible schedule, SGSES performs a local search step by applying ES. Otherwise, if for a
given Kˆ no feasible solution is found, the main loop (lines 3-13)
is interrupted, since no further solutions can be found for values
of makespan less than the current Kˆ . At algorithm termination, the
set of non-dominated solutions found is ﬁnally returned. The computational complexity of lines 3 − 13 is dominated by the one of
ES. Therefore, the complexity of SGS-ES corresponds to the one of
ES, up to a multiplicative factor of K max − K min + 1.

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

425

Fig. 4.9. An example of an EPS swap to illustrate the update operations performed.

Fig. 4.10. An example of the application of ES.

Algorithm 4.4 Split-Greedy Scheduler with Exchange Search (SGSES)
A set J = {1, . . . , N} of jobs, with processing time p j , j ∈ J.
A set H = {1, . . . , M} of machines, with unitary energy
consumption rate eh , h ∈ H.
A set T = {1, . . . , K max } of time slots, with energy price
ck , k ∈ T .
Output A set of eﬃcient solutions, each of which characterized
by a pair (C max , TEC).

1: K min ← max{
j∈J p j /M , max j∈J { p j }}
2: Initialize the set of solutions F ← ∅ and makespan Kˆ ← K max
3: while Kˆ ≥ K min do
Tˆ ← {1, . . . , Kˆ }
4:
S ← Split -Greedy-Heuristic (J, H, Tˆ )
5:
Input

if S is a feasible schedule then
S ← Exchange-Search(J, H, Tˆ , S )
else
8:
break
9:
10:
end if
Compute C max and T EC of S and add (C max , T EC ) to F
11:
Kˆ ← Kˆ − 1
12:
13: end while
14: return the non-dominated solutions in the solution set F
6:

7:

5. Experimental results
In this section, the results of the set of experimental tests
performed to validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach
are shown. In order to provide more comprehensive results,
30 new very large-scale (VLS) instances (numbered from 61 to
90) were added to the set of 30 small-scale instances (numbered from 1 to 30) and the medium- and large-scale (MLS)
instances (numbered from 31 to 60) proposed in Wang et al.
(2018). The instances and the results obtained with our approach
are available at https://github.com/ORresearcher/A- bi- objectiveheuristic- approach- for- green- identical- parallel- machine- scheduling.
For generating the VLS instances, the following combinations of
parameters N, M, and K were used: M ∈ {25, 30, 40}, N ∈ {250, 300,
350, 400, 500}, K ∈ {350, 500}. Moreover, the processing times pj ,
j ∈ J, were randomly generated from U[1, 12]. In order to reﬂect
the tendencies of a highly volatile electricity market, the values
of eh , h ∈ H, and ck , k ∈ T, were randomly drawn from the uniform

distributions U[1, 6] and U[1, 8], respectively. Such choice fostered
the generation of smaller time intervals with respect to the ones
in Wang et al. (2018).
The experimental tests were carried out on a Windows 10 system equipped with a 2.2 gigahertz, 6 core Intel(R) Core i7-8750H
CPU and 16 gigabytes of RAM. SGS-ES was implemented in Java 11,
and the MATLAB implementation of CH kindly provided by Wang
et al. (2018) was re-implemented in Java 11 to guarantee a fair
comparison of the computational times. In addition, the Java version of CH was modiﬁed so that it does not return an unfeasible
solution whenever it is not able to produce a feasible one, as discussed in Section 4.1. In order to validate the correctness of the CH
re-implementation, the results obtained by the Java version of CH
were compared with the ones produced by the MATLAB version.
Such comparisons were all successful (i.e., their results coincide),
except for the instances for which the MATLAB version generated
an unfeasible solution.
Instead of using NSGA-II as a reference method for comparison,
as it is done in Wang et al. (2018), we considered two more recent multi-objective approaches: NSGA-III (Deb & Jain, 2013) and
the multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition (MOEA/D) proposed in Zhang and Li (2007). Both algorithms
were implemented in Java 11.
Section 5.1 brieﬂy introduces the performance metrics used to
compare the multi-objective methods. Then, Section 5.2 analyzes
the improvements obtained with the introduction of ES. The performance analysis performed on the small-scale instances is reported in Section 5.3. Section 5.4 brieﬂy describes NSGA-III and
MOEA/D, the two approaches compared to SGS-ES other than CH.
Finally, Section 5.5 presents the experimental results obtained in
testing the different methods on the MLS and VLS instances.
5.1. Performance Analysis
Two classes of performance metrics are considered in Wang
et al. (2018): the ﬁrst aims at assessing the quality of a Pareto
front, whereas the second evaluates the distribution of the eﬃcient solutions on the Pareto front. To make the comparison with
the results in Wang et al. (2018) more appropriate, we refer to the
main indices reported in Wang et al. (2018), adding the Hypervolume (Zitzler & Thiele, 1999), and also considering the Empirical Attainment Function (EAF) (Da Fonseca, Fonseca, & Hall, 2001).
Of the three quality measures adopted in Wang et al. (2018),
only two of them are evaluated in this paper:

426
•

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

DR (Ishibuchi, Yoshida, & Murata, 2003) is computed for a front
F with respect to a reference Pareto front S∗ as

DR ( F ) =

1 

|S ∗ | y∈S ∗

min{dxy : x ∈ F }

(11)

n
∗
∗
2
where dxy =
k=1 ( f k (x ) − f k (y )) is the Euclidean distance
between two points x and y included in two distinct fronts,
n is the dimension of the objective space, fk∗ (a ) =
fkmax and

fk (a )− fkmin

is

f max − f min
k
k
fkmin are the

the normalized k-th objective value, and
maximum and minimum values of the k-th objective function
in the reference front S∗ , respectively. If the optimal Pareto front
is unknown, then S∗ is obtained as the set of non dominated
solutions in the union of the compared fronts. Smaller values
of DR denote higher quality fronts.
• Purity (Bandyopadhyay, Pal, & Aruna, 2004), deﬁned as

Nd (F ∗ ∩ F )
Nd (F )

P (F ) =

(12)

where Nd (F) is the number of eﬃcient solutions of front F.
Larger values of Purity denote higher quality fronts.
Opposite to (Wang et al., 2018), the number of eﬃcient solutions of a front is not reported since it is a not relevant quality
index for comparing fronts. For instance, a front F with a larger
number of points can be completely dominated by another front F
including far less points.
The second class includes the two following distribution and
spread metrics used in Wang et al. (2018):
•

Minimal Spacing (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2004) given by

MS(F ) =

 1 N
d (F )
(δi − δ )2 1/2
Nd (F )
i=1

(13)

where

δi = min
j =i

n


| f k ( xi ) − f k ( x j )|

(14)

k=1

and

δ=
•

1
Nd (F ) − 1

Nd (F )−1



δi

(15)

i=1

Spread (Deb et al., 2002), here denoted D2 as in Wang et al.
(2018), given by

Nd (F )−1

|di − d |
D2 ( F ) =
d f + dl + (Nd (F ) − 1 )d
d f + dl +

i=1

(16)

where


n

di =

fk (xi ) − fk (xi+1

2

1/2

(17)

and


1
di
Nd (F ) − 1
n

(18)

k=1

being xi and xi+1 two consecutive points in front F, and df and
dl the Euclidean distances between the extreme solutions and
the boundary solutions of front F, i.e.,

df =


n

fkmax − max fk (xi ) 2

1/2

(19)

fkmin − min fk (xi ) 2

1/2

(20)

i

k=1

and

dl =


n
k=1

F M1 ( F ) =

i

|U (F )|
|F |

(21)

where U(F) denotes the set of unfeasible points of F. FM2 provides
the average percentage of non-scheduled jobs in the unfeasible instances produced by an algorithm and it is computed as

F M2 ( F ) =

k=1

d=

The smaller are the values for all the indices of this second
class, the better is the distribution of the solution points in the
front. However, we consider the distribution and spread indices
only secondary to quality indices. In fact, we believe that the indices in the second class should be used to discern among fronts
with a comparable degree of quality. As an example, we can consider a well distributed front that is totally dominated by another
front which is instead poorly distributed: in such a situation we
deem not appropriate to compensate the worse quality with the
better distribution performance.
Besides the above indices used in Wang et al. (2018), we report
the values of the Hypervolume (Zitzler & Thiele, 1999). This index
provides a comprehensive evaluation of a Pareto front estimation
since it measures the volume (or area, as in the two dimensional
case dealt with in this paper) covered by a front with respect to a
reference point in the objectives space. Therefore, it can be used to
compare two or more fronts assuming a common reference point.
Larger Hypervolume values denote a better approximation of the
actual Pareto front, both in terms of quality and distribution of the
solution points.
The comparison between two fronts can be performed also using EAF introduced in Da Fonseca et al. (2001). EAF provides a
graphic representation of the probability of an algorithm to produce solutions that dominate a given point of the objective space
in a single run (Minella, Ruiz, & Ciavotta, 2011). In particular, the
Differential Empirical Attainment Function (Diff-EAF) proposed in
López-Ibánez, Paquete, and Stützle (2006) shows the differences
between a pair of EAFs graphically, highlighting the regions of
the objective space in which an algorithm outperforms another in
terms of produced solutions. However, since EAF and Diff-EAF do
not provide an overall score, differently from the other indicators
previously introduced, with these metrics the analysis can only be
performed by observing the obtained diagrams. For this reason, in
this paper we only report some examples of Diff-EAF.
Finally, we deﬁne two metrics, FM1 and FM2 , to evaluate the
feasibility of a front produced by an algorithm. In particular, these
metrics are introduced to measure the incidence of the presence of
unfeasible solution points in the fronts generated by CH since, as
pointed out in Section 4.1, for some instances CH fails to schedule
all the jobs. The feasibility metric FM1 (F) computes the percentage
of unfeasible points in a front F produced by an algorithm as

|Jns |
if F M1 (F ) = 0
|U (F )|N

0

(22)

otherwise

where Jns is the set of non-scheduled jobs in the unfeasible solutions points of front F.
5.2. Effectiveness of the ES procedure
The ﬁrst performance evaluation aims at comparing SGS and
SGS-ES to determine whether ES is inﬂuential in obtaining better
results. Table 5.1 reports the Hypervolume, Purity and Spread (D2 )
as quality and distribution indices, and the computational times
(CPU) in seconds for the two proposed heuristics, for both the MLS
and the VLS instances. In addition, the rows Avg and N.Best in
Table 5.1 show the averages and the number of instances for which
a method has the best index value. In all the rows, the best values
are in boldface. For each pair of compared methods, the last row
p in Table 5.1 reports the probability value returned by the Friedman non-parametric test that we used to assess the signiﬁcance

Table 5.1
Comparison of SGS and SGS-ES for the MLS and VLS instances.
Hypervolume

Purity

D2

CPU

Istance

SGS-ES

SGS

SGS-ES

SGS

SGS-ES

SGS

SGS-ES

SGS

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60

0.8813
0.8090
0.7791
0.6960
0.6011
0.8542
0.8709
0.8409
0.7830
0.7827
0.9282
0.8529
0.8613
0.8312
0.7900
0.8242
0.8832
0.8724
0.8025
0.8275
0.8457
0.8657
0.8875
0.8836
0.8445
0.8867
0.7435
0.9057
0.9012
0.8169

0.8790
0.8082
0.7777
0.6901
0.6009
0.8518
0.8695
0.8399
0.7814
0.7730
0.9282
0.8523
0.8599
0.8301
0.7871
0.8194
0.8811
0.8676
0.7972
0.8226
0.8427
0.8642
0.8864
0.8825
0.8417
0.8852
0.7377
0.9047
0.9002
0.8150

0.9232
0.9742
0.9876
0.9510
1.0000
0.9496
0.9463
0.8638
0.9895
0.9553
1.0000
0.9943
0.8563
0.7902
0.9491
0.9145
0.8538
0.9573
0.9686
0.9864
0.9286
0.8922
0.9411
0.9019
0.9874
0.9792
0.9392
0.9960
0.8873
0.9478

0.4475
0.8478
0.5517
0.2159
0.9541
0.6613
0.4795
0.4692
0.6211
0.2247
0.9938
0.8179
0.3881
0.4311
0.3861
0.4845
0.4783
0.1964
0.1526
0.3545
0.6523
0.5680
0.4613
0.4204
0.4762
0.7035
0.4743
0.5480
0.4814
0.5063

0.9173
0.9482
0.8728
0.7688
0.5066
0.7243
0.8880
1.1245
0.8684
0.8447
0.8120
0.9458
1.0217
1.0712
0.8651
0.5920
0.7928
0.7753
0.8234
0.6961
0.8498
0.7515
0.8235
0.6813
0.8538
0.8028
0.6317
0.6884
0.9665
0.7862

0.9292
0.9458
0.8882
0.7570
0.5027
0.7106
0.8757
1.1427
0.8748
0.8456
0.8125
0.9489
1.0239
1.0695
0.8599
0.6045
0.7968
0.7696
0.8118
0.7183
0.8278
0.7907
0.8185
0.7081
0.8484
0.7363
0.6155
0.7099
0.9515
0.7788

0.0518
0.0738
0.0937
0.1220
0.0586
0.0810
0.1202
0.1838
0.2712
0.3673
0.0815
0.1289
0.1995
0.3085
0.5005
0.4204
0.7459
0.9804
1.4556
1.8296
0.7754
1.1850
1.6191
2.1862
3.3929
1.1292
1.7694
2.4266
4.6183
4.2915

0.0104
0.0181
0.0254
0.0299
0.0251
0.0171
0.0214
0.0317
0.0430
0.0548
0.0161
0.0252
0.0338
0.0481
0.0622
0.1037
0.1384
0.1999
0.2815
0.3628
0.1494
0.1941
0.2666
0.3516
0.4477
0.1762
0.2853
0.3276
0.4209
0.5277

Avg
N.Best
p

0.8318
0.8292
30
0
7.24E-04

0.9404
0.5149
30
0
4.32E-04

0.8231
14

0.8225
16

1.0489
0.1565
0
30
4.32E-04

0.715

61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90

Hypervolume

Purity

SGS-ES

SGS

SGS-ES

SGS

SGS-ES

SGS

SGS-ES

SGS

0.8198
0.8295
0.7660
0.7862
0.7245
0.8014
0.7581
0.7391
0.7368
0.7508
0.8057
0.8735
0.7955
0.8508
0.7888
0.8508
0.7478
0.7890
0.7464
0.8158
0.8201
0.8646
0.8199
0.8282
0.8237
0.8308
0.8091
0.8372
0.7629
0.8093

0.8130
0.8220
0.7599
0.7805
0.7116
0.7910
0.7518
0.7266
0.7289
0.7378
0.7987
0.8691
0.7878
0.8456
0.7825
0.8438
0.7404
0.7781
0.7371
0.8099
0.8147
0.8596
0.8135
0.8230
0.8175
0.8248
0.8034
0.8308
0.7485
0.8004

0.9994
1.0000
1.0000
0.9996
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.9998
1.0000
0.9999
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.9992
1.0000
1.0000
0.9999
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.9987
0.9970
0.9992
0.9998
1.0000
0.9999
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.9998

0.0068
0.0032
0.0078
0.0033
0.0044
0.0075
0.0060
0.0046
0.0188
0.0064
0.0000
0.0000
0.0041
0.0048
0.0043
0.0059
0.0050
0.0058
0.0128
0.0035
0.0062
0.0066
0.0024
0.0041
0.0030
0.0007
0.0003
0.0033
0.0004
0.0066

1.0602
1.0119
0.8898
0.9226
0.8744
0.9823
0.8073
0.8607
0.8101
0.8576
0.9612
1.0414
0.9906
1.0319
0.9003
0.9747
0.8656
0.9621
0.8274
0.9324
0.9468
1.1053
1.0663
0.9831
1.0316
0.9742
0.9481
1.0088
0.9555
1.0377

1.0461
1.0160
0.8866
0.9076
0.8567
0.9981
0.7831
0.8409
0.8012
0.8521
0.9786
1.0401
0.9669
1.0230
0.8973
0.9655
0.8538
0.9639
0.7982
0.9251
0.9510
1.1441
1.0665
0.9930
1.0450
0.9781
0.9412
1.0124
0.9426
1.0320

21.7450
62.3640
25.8207
57.0123
30.4711
75.7831
25.9146
84.8752
25.9769
90.3612
25.2129
65.3719
30.7839
77.8728
34.7806
92.2981
37.2449
107.1587
45.8857
101.0368
37.5365
92.0232
42.3040
113.6161
49.3493
129.1932
52.3694
149.7154
72.6986
161.0501

0.8068
1.7699
0.8211
1.8385
0.8903
2.0618
0.8793
2.1309
0.9363
2.4123
0.8829
2.0116
0.9326
2.1324
0.9713
2.2562
1.0383
2.4133
1.1171
2.6189
1.0809
2.4982
1.1566
2.5701
1.2331
2.7451
1.2788
2.9976
1.3990
3.2595

0.7994
0.7918
30
0
4.32E-04

D2

0.9997
0.0050
30
0
4.32E-04

CPU

0.9541
0.9502
11
19
0.1441

1.7047
67.2609
0
30
4.32E-04

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

Instance

427

428

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

Table 5.2
Comparison between SGS-ES and MIP solver for the small-scale instances.
Instance

D2

Hypervolume

Purity

SGS-ES

MIP

SGS-ES

MIP

DR
SGS-ES

MIP

SGS-ES

MIP

SGS-ES

MIP

SGS-ES

MIP

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

0.7460
0.7744
0.7398
0.7563
0.8016
0.8234
0.7257
0.8138
0.7561
0.7722
0.8077
0.8485
0.6900
0.7532
0.7508
0.7987
0.7082
0.8107
0.5785
0.7294
0.7455
0.7968
0.7704
0.8403
0.6976
0.7683
0.7425
0.7438
0.4531
0.7697

0.7460
0.7756
0.7587
0.7566
0.8019
0.8247
0.7259
0.8153
0.7687
0.7732
0.8077
0.8506
0.6900
0.7548
0.7520
0.7993
0.7086
0.8156
0.5794
0.7294
0.7458
0.7970
0.7743
0.8413
0.6976
0.7683
0.7425
0.7438
0.4531
0.7697

1.0000
0.8919
0.2321
0.9444
0.9400
0.7882
0.9815
0.8938
0.2367
0.8704
1.0000
0.6032
1.0000
0.7588
0.8356
0.8560
0.8591
0.3508
0.8419
1.0000
0.9292
0.9245
0.6714
0.7955
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000

1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000

0.0000
0.0018
0.0230
0.0004
0.0004
0.0024
0.0003
0.0012
0.0128
0.0014
0.0000
0.0028
0.0000
0.0016
0.0012
0.0005
0.0006
0.0061
0.0010
0.0000
0.0004
0.0008
0.0043
0.0013
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.7161
0.7251
0.8110
0.9532
0.9381
0.9323
0.7267
0.8283
0.8176
0.7425
1.1115
0.9929
0.8796
0.7130
0.9246
0.8275
0.5138
0.8817
0.4309
0.6909
0.7395
0.8954
0.9491
1.0476
0.5976
0.8472
0.6324
0.8421
0.1677
0.6432

0.7161
0.7175
0.7460
0.9428
0.9422
0.9230
0.7275
0.8272
0.8343
0.7413
1.1115
0.9912
0.8796
0.7172
0.9317
0.8541
0.5159
0.8804
0.4210
0.6909
0.7396
0.8872
0.9876
1.0415
0.5976
0.8472
0.6324
0.8421
0.1677
0.6432

0.0465
0.0389
0.1053
0.0932
0.1101
0.0903
0.0508
0.0427
0.0606
0.0593
0.0724
0.0671
0.0382
0.0324
0.0393
0.0328
0.0697
0.0371
0.0521
0.0338
0.0517
0.0349
0.0380
0.0402
0.1111
0.1042
0.1558
0.0977
0.1830
0.1486

0.0465
0.0387
0.0993
0.0944
0.1101
0.0902
0.0509
0.0430
0.0635
0.0593
0.0724
0.0680
0.0382
0.0327
0.0395
0.0317
0.0706
0.0365
0.0520
0.0338
0.0517
0.0362
0.0383
0.0403
0.1111
0.1042
0.1558
0.0977
0.1830
0.1486

0.0078
0.0114
0.0093
0.0197
0.0099
0.0226
0.0055
0.0134
0.0087
0.0210
0.0121
0.0288
0.0060
0.0170
0.0119
0.0339
0.0151
0.0400
0.0068
0.0142
0.0144
0.0230
0.0128
0.0365
0.0028
0.0063
0.0044
0.0100
0.0061
0.0126

5.5390
10.9800
3.0620
11.5170
6.5380
10.2230
6.7180
13.2710
4.1010
28.3040
12.5770
22.0210
5.1190
13.9760
10.8840
33.5990
12.5390
37.1280
5.5510
42.6370
7.4410
65.0460
13.8730
31.3870
2.7050
5.0450
3.0710
4.6290
1.8440
4.9150

Avg
N.Best
p

0.7504
0.7522
0
20
7.74E-02

0.8402
1.0000
0
20
7.74E-02

0.0021
0.0000
0
20
7.74E-02

of the difference between the average values. More speciﬁcally, we
assume that if p is smaller than 1%, then we can reject the null
hypothesis that the two compared methods generate not signiﬁcantly different results. Since both SGS and SGS-ES include random
choices used to break ties (as detailed in Sections 4.1 and 4.2), the
comparison between the two methods for the considered indices
was carried out by averaging all possible comparisons between 10
runs of one method with 10 runs of the other. For the sake of
compactness, the results regarding DR and Minimal Spacing are not
shown. Observing Table 5.1, we can note that SGS-ES prevailed in
the Hypervolume and Purity indices on both the sets of instances,
whereas SGS got slightly better average values for Spread. However, the statistical tests reveal that SGS-ES is signiﬁcantly better than SGS for Hypervolume and Purity, whereas the results for
Spread are statistically comparable. As regards the CPU times, SGSES, that includes the local search ES, is obviously more demanding
than SGS, which in turn is a constructive heuristics. However, the
average CPU time required by SGS-ES, that for the VLS instances is
about 67 seconds, can be considered acceptable, especially in view
of the achieved improvement in the performance results.
5.3. Analysis for the small-scale instances
In the second performance evaluation, the results produced by
SGS-ES for the small-scale instances were compared with the ones
generated by the MIP model presented in Section 3. To this end,
we implemented an  -constraint algorithm in Java 11 with CPLEX
12.10 as a MIP solver. In particular, the algorithm iteratively solves
the MIP model of Section 3, minimizing only the objective (2), and
imposing a decreasing upper bound for Cmax from K down to Kmin
in constraint (8) at each iteration, terminating as soon as no feasible solution is found for a given upper bound. The obtained results

Min Spacing

0.7840
0.7832
9
11
0.6547

CPU

0.0713
0.0713
11
6
0.2253

0.0148
14.5413
30
0
4.32E-08

Table 5.3
Feasibility metrics applied to CH-M.
Instance
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
Avg
Non-feasible

FM1

1.54%

FM2

3.00%

0.95%

2.67%

0.79%

2.67%

0.72%

2.00%

1.00%
13.33%

2.58%

Instance

FM1

FM2

61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90

0.81%
0.58%
0.83%
0.85%
0.41%

2.00%
2.80%
1.50%
3.00%
0.57%

1.81%
1.17%
0.51%
1.23%
1.28%
0.78%
1.72%

3.50%
3.06%
1.60%
2.40%
2.00%
1.40%
3.42%

1.73%
1.44%
0.83%
0.55%
1.30%
1.37%
1.72%
0.31%
0.43%
0.30%
1.69%

3.93%
4.14%
3.25%
4.25%
2.47%
2.00%
3.40%
0.80%
1.00%
0.33%
3.43%

0.45%
0.61%
0.43%
0.60%
0.95%
90.00%

0.50%
3.75%
3.40%
1.80%
2.43%

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

429

Table 5.4
Comparison of Hypervolume and quality indices of SGS-ES, CH-J, NSGA-III and MOEA/D for the MLS instances.
Instance

Hypervolume

Purity

DR

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60

0.8816
0.8135
0.7772
0.6962
0.6011
0.8868
0.8709
0.8405
0.7793
0.7827
0.9282
0.8569
0.8612
0.8312
0.7900
0.8173
0.8949
0.8724
0.8059
0.8275
0.8492
0.8681
0.8875
0.8836
0.8445
0.8867
0.7435
0.9057
0.9017
0.8184

0.8717
0.8006
0.7736
0.6838
0.5875
0.8771
0.8658
0.8380
0.7742
0.7687
0.9276
0.8541
0.8573
0.8285
0.7800
0.8096
0.8903
0.8654
0.7865
0.8119
0.8397
0.8657
0.8847
0.8803
0.8411
0.8833
0.7353
0.9046
0.8995
0.8162

0.8717
0.8006
0.7736
0.6839
0.5875
0.8773
0.8658
0.8380
0.7742
0.7687
0.9280
0.8541
0.8573
0.8285
0.7800
0.8114
0.8903
0.8654
0.7865
0.8120
0.8420
0.8658
0.8847
0.8803
0.8411
0.8841
0.7363
0.9046
0.8995
0.8162

0.8717
0.8006
0.7736
0.6839
0.5875
0.8771
0.8658
0.8380
0.7742
0.7687
0.9280
0.8541
0.8573
0.8285
0.7800
0.8096
0.8903
0.8654
0.7865
0.8119
0.8420
0.8658
0.8847
0.8803
0.8411
0.8841
0.7363
0.9046
0.8995
0.8162

0.99556
1.00000
1.00000
0.99349
1.00000
1.00000
0.98307
0.84029
1.00000
0.98297
0.93750
1.00000
0.96216
0.80172
0.86024
0.89985
0.94731
0.87835
1.00000
0.99789
0.81529
0.79728
0.93060
0.97846
0.97501
0.87550
0.85679
1.00000
0.96119
0.93429

0.0540
0.0981
0.3702
0.1082
0.3889
0.5043
0.2972
0.4113
0.3333
0.1188
0.9267
0.7143
0.1918
0.3508
0.2411
0.3596
0.3377
0.2500
0.0000
0.3222
0.4771
0.5429
0.3286
0.1765
0.4133
0.4033
0.5326
0.4483
0.3170
0.3607

0.0540
0.0983
0.3702
0.1082
0.3889
0.5304
0.2992
0.4113
0.3333
0.1188
0.9933
0.7143
0.1918
0.3508
0.2411
0.4207
0.3377
0.2500
0.0000
0.3222
0.5600
0.5429
0.3286
0.1765
0.4133
0.5278
0.6011
0.4483
0.3170
0.3607

0.0540
0.0981
0.3702
0.1082
0.3889
0.5043
0.2972
0.4113
0.3333
0.1188
0.9933
0.7143
0.1918
0.3508
0.2411
0.3596
0.3377
0.2500
0.0000
0.3222
0.5486
0.5429
0.3286
0.1765
0.4133
0.5144
0.5853
0.4483
0.3170
0.3607

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0001
0.0006
0.0000
0.0001
0.0016
0.0000
0.0002
0.0004
0.0006
0.0006
0.0001
0.0004
0.0000
0.0000
0.0051
0.0022
0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
0.0016
0.0009
0.0000
0.0000
0.0003

0.0117
0.0103
0.0032
0.0120
0.0115
0.0079
0.0069
0.0039
0.0052
0.0109
0.0016
0.0031
0.0045
0.0029
0.0084
0.0072
0.0134
0.0076
0.0158
0.0134
0.0107
0.0101
0.0058
0.0056
0.0026
0.0082
0.0040
0.0039
0.0040
0.0037

0.0116
0.0102
0.0032
0.0119
0.0115
0.0076
0.0068
0.0039
0.0052
0.0109
0.0000
0.0031
0.0045
0.0029
0.0084
0.0068
0.0134
0.0076
0.0158
0.0134
0.0056
0.0101
0.0058
0.0056
0.0026
0.0054
0.0031
0.0039
0.0040
0.0037

0.0117
0.0103
0.0032
0.0119
0.0115
0.0079
0.0069
0.0039
0.0052
0.0109
0.0000
0.0031
0.0045
0.0029
0.0084
0.0072
0.0134
0.0076
0.0159
0.0134
0.0058
0.0101
0.0058
0.0056
0.0026
0.0055
0.0031
0.0039
0.0040
0.0037

Avg
N.Best
p
Mean rank
Rank position

0.8335
30

0.8267
0.8270
0
0
1.87E-17
1.75
2.2
2
2

0.8269
0

0.94016
29

0.3560
1

0.0005
29

3.9333
1

1.9833
2

1.0833
1

0.0073
0.0070
0
1
2.05E-15
3.2167
2.6667
2
2

0.0070
1

2.05
2

0.3460
0.3604
0
1
4.49E-16
1.8
2.2833
2
2

4
1

are shown in Table 5.2, which reports all the considered indices
and the CPU time. Table 5.2 shows that, on average, the MIP model
produced better results for Hypervolume and the other two quality indices, i.e., Purity and DR , whereas there is no statistical difference for the two distribution indices, i.e., Spread and Minimal
Spacing. On the other hand, we can also note that SGS-ES found
the same average result of the MIP model for Hypervolume, Purity and DR for 10 out of 30 instances. As regards the CPU time,
SGS-ES was able to solve the small-scale instances with an average
time of three order of magnitude less than the MIP model. Taking into account this observation, we can consider the results for
the small-scale instances produced by SGS-ES acceptable. However,
as we show in the following section, the effectiveness of SGS-ES
emerges for larger instances that cannot be solved in acceptable
times by the MIP model.
5.4. The compared algorithms
As discussed in Section 3, the version of CH provided by Wang
et al. (2018) may accept unfeasible solutions in the estimated
Pareto front, since CH fails to recognize that the upper bound imposed by the maximum makespan at each iteration may not allow
to schedule some jobs, producing a partial schedule instead of reporting unfeasibility. The version of CH implemented in Java, in the
following denoted as CH-J, differs from the original algorithm, denoted as CH-M, since CH-J does not generate unfeasible points in
the Pareto front. We tested CH-M on both MLS and VLS instances,
reporting the feasibility metrics FM1 and FM2 in Table 5.3. From
this table we can observe that about 13% of the MLS instances
includes unfeasible solution points in the produced Pareto fronts,

3.0333
2

and on average, in such instances, 1% of solution points are unfeasible since an average of 2.58% of the jobs are not scheduled. If we
consider the new set of VLS instances, Table 5.3 shows that most of
the instances (90%) include solution points with unscheduled jobs,
even if the average number of points and the average number of
unscheduled jobs are similar to the ones for the MLS instances.
Therefore, in the experimental tests presented in the following, we
consider the results produced by CH-J.
As previously stated, we compared SGS-ES, with CH-J, NSGA-III,
and MOEA/D. Both NSGA-III (Deb & Jain, 2013) and NSGA-II (Deb
et al., 2002) are two well known and similar multi-objective evolutionary algorithms. NSGA-III differs from NSGA-II in the operator used to select the solutions to be included in the population
since, to ensure the diversity of the obtained solutions, NSGA-III
adopts a predeﬁned set of reference points instead of the nichepreservation operator based on the crowding distance exploited by
NSGA-II. Also MOEA/D (Zhang & Li, 2007) is an evolutionary multiobjective method based on a similar idea, since a set of weight
vectors is deﬁned a priori, and each generated solution is uniquely
associated with a single vector to guarantee the solutions diversity.
We implemented NSGA-III converting the MATLAB version of
NSGA-II used in Wang et al. (2018), and kindly shared by the authors. Therefore, we preserved the same design of NSGA-II, i.e., the
same solution representation, initialization procedure, crossover
and mutation operators, as well as the same parameters setting.
The readers interested in the details of this algorithm, omitted here
for the sake of brevity, can refer to (Wang et al., 2018). Similarly,
we implemented the standard MOEA/D algorithm presented in
Zhang and Li (2007), and we adapted it to the considered problem,
exploiting again some parts of the designed NSGA-III, i.e., the same

430

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

Table 5.5
Comparison of distribution indices and CPU time of SGS-ES. CH-J. NSGA-III and MOEA/D for the MLS instances.
Instance

D2

Min Spacing

CPU

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60

0.9173
0.9482
0.8728
0.7687
0.5066
0.7243
0.8880
1.1245
0.8684
0.8447
0.8159
0.9458
1.0217
1.0712
0.8651
0.5925
0.7928
0.7753
0.8234
0.6961
0.8559
0.7515
0.8235
0.6813
0.8538
0.8049
0.6317
0.6884
0.9664
0.7862

0.9638
0.8792
0.8562
0.7887
0.6053
0.6877
0.9034
1.0910
0.8764
0.8119
0.7885
0.9669
0.9456
1.0759
0.8328
0.6452
0.7753
0.7632
0.8301
0.6925
0.8635
0.6922
0.7922
0.6765
0.8308
0.7689
0.6023
0.6690
0.8668
0.7681

0.9662
0.8782
0.8562
0.7887
0.6053
0.6927
0.9006
1.0910
0.8764
0.8118
0.7667
0.9668
0.9456
1.0759
0.8328
0.6491
0.7753
0.7636
0.8435
0.6925
0.8297
0.6921
0.7922
0.6764
0.8308
0.7824
0.6018
0.6690
0.8668
0.7681

0.9638
0.8792
0.8562
0.7887
0.6053
0.6877
0.9034
1.0910
0.8764
0.8119
0.7667
0.9669
0.9456
1.0759
0.8328
0.6452
0.7753
0.7632
0.8508
0.6925
0.8297
0.6922
0.7922
0.6765
0.8308
0.7821
0.6023
0.6690
0.8668
0.7681

0.0453
0.0304
0.0232
0.0169
0.0205
0.0770
0.0515
0.0303
0.0244
0.0250
0.1247
0.0682
0.0376
0.0261
0.0237
0.0487
0.0282
0.0223
0.0088
0.0172
0.1124
0.0848
0.0388
0.0338
0.0144
0.1013
0.0835
0.0558
0.0232
0.0228

0.0443
0.0294
0.0238
0.0171
0.0232
0.0694
0.0509
0.0298
0.0243
0.0258
0.1259
0.0713
0.0389
0.0261
0.0237
0.0510
0.0264
0.0219
0.0089
0.0155
0.1550
0.0903
0.0379
0.0341
0.0148
0.1122
0.0993
0.0557
0.0203
0.0238

0.0445
0.0295
0.0238
0.0170
0.0232
0.0696
0.0509
0.0298
0.0243
0.0258
0.1234
0.0712
0.0389
0.0261
0.0237
0.0509
0.0264
0.0220
0.0091
0.0155
0.1522
0.0892
0.0379
0.0341
0.0148
0.1116
0.0996
0.0557
0.0203
0.0238

0.0443
0.0294
0.0238
0.0170
0.0232
0.0694
0.0509
0.0298
0.0243
0.0258
0.1234
0.0713
0.0389
0.0261
0.0237
0.0510
0.0264
0.0219
0.0093
0.0155
0.1524
0.0892
0.0379
0.0341
0.0148
0.1115
0.0996
0.0557
0.0203
0.0238

0.0518
0.0738
0.0937
0.1220
0.0586
0.0810
0.1202
0.1838
0.2712
0.3673
0.0815
0.1289
0.1995
0.3085
0.5005
0.4204
0.7459
0.9804
1.4556
1.8296
0.7754
1.1850
1.6191
2.1862
3.3929
1.1292
1.7694
2.4266
4.6183
4.2915

0.2630
0.1037
0.1145
0.0928
0.0918
0.2132
0.1646
0.2798
0.1295
0.1424
0.1231
0.1181
0.1376
0.1456
0.1736
2.7928
2.8224
2.9008
5.8274
2.8851
5.3334
5.3997
5.4256
5.4775
5.7765
8.5075
8.4910
8.4105
8.5497
8.5050

14.0060
14.4933
15.1787
16.0313
17.3539
15.1890
15.3972
16.1686
17.0252
17.6690
14.7031
15.3369
15.7598
16.7421
18.4610
16.9153
17.0613
17.7563
21.1909
19.4386
19.7377
20.4408
20.8525
22.1008
22.7618
23.0410
23.5395
24.5284
25.4301
26.9437

2.8346
3.3755
4.9112
6.4969
8.2203
3.0904
4.3526
5.9278
8.3602
10.3599
3.4379
4.8556
6.4588
8.9836
12.3467
5.2404
6.1811
7.5760
11.8035
10.7617
8.4114
9.6556
11.3704
12.8782
15.9638
12.5976
13.0080
15.3027
18.2997
20.8700

Avg
N.Best
p
Mean rank
Rank position

0.8236
9

0.8103
13

0.8096
15
0.0138
2.3833
2.2
1, 2
1

0.8096
13

0.0440
16

0.0464
12

0.0462
12

1.0489
23

2.3667
1

2.4667
1

1.2333
1

2.9799
18.7085
7
0
5.28E-18
1.7667
4
1
3

9.1311
0

2.35
1, 2

0.0462
5
0.8082
2.6333
2.5333
1
1

3.0667
2

solution representation, initialization procedure, crossover operator, and termination condition used in Wang et al. (2018). In addition, at each iteration of MOEA/D, we generate the candidate solutions to possibly update the ones currently associated with each
weight vector, by means of the crossover operator in Wang et al.
(2018). This operator is applied to a pair of parent solutions randomly extracted from the set including the CW solutions associated with the closest weight vectors, where the parameter CW is
ﬁxed to 10 as in Zhang and Li (2007).
5.5. Comparing SGS-ES with CH, NSGA-III and MOEA/D
Tables 5.4, 5.5, 5.6 and 5.7 show the comparisons among SGSES, CH-J, NSGA-III and MOEA/D. Since these tables report a comparison of four methods, we insert two last rows, which allow to
discriminate the rank position of each method, besides the rows
giving the average (Avg), the number of instances for which an algorithm produces the best value (N.Best), and the p value from the
Friedman test. In particular, the row Mean rank gives the corresponding value returned by the multiple comparison test based on
the Friedman test result, and the row Rank position shows the relative ranking for each index, considering the 99% conﬁdence interval
(note that rank 1 denotes the best method, and that methods that
produced not statistically different results have the same rank).
Tables 5.4 and 5.5 provide the average values of the performance indices for the MLS instances. The SGS-ES approach clearly
prevails as far as Hypervolume and the two quality indices in
Table 5.4 are concerned, since it produced the best average value
and it has the best rank. As far as distribution indices are concerned, in Table 5.5 we show that SGS-ES yielded the best average

3
2

results for Minimal Spacing, whereas MOEA/D has the best average for Spread (D2 ). For both Spread and Minimal Spacing, the p
values denote that the results for the tested methods are statistically equivalent. In addition, all the methods share the same rank
for Minimal Spacing, whereas only NSGA-III has a better rank than
SGS-ES for Spread. For this set of instances, SGS-ES and CH-J are
also the best methods as regards the computational times, since,
even if SGS-ES needed on average less than half the CPU time of
CH-J, they share the same rank.
The results for the VLS instances are reported in Tables 5.6 and
5.7. Even in this case, SGS-ES outperformed the other methods for
the indices in Table 5.6. Observing Table 5.7, we can note that CH-J
produced the best result for Spread and Minimal Spacing. However,
the p values for such indices reveal the statistical equivalence of
the methods. Finally, the computational times required by SGS-ES
were signiﬁcantly better than the ones of all the other methods.
The results obtained by SGS-ES for the sets of MLS and VLS instances show the effectiveness of SGS-ES, that was able to produce
higher quality results in far less time compared to all the other
tested heuristic methods. In Fig. 5.1, we also ﬁnally report an example of three pairs of comparisons of SGS-ES with the competitor methods (i.e., CH-J, NSGA-III and MOEA/D) for a MLS instance,
given by means of the Diff-EAFs obtained using the visualization
tool proposed in López-Ibánez, Paquete, and Stützle (2010). Apart
from CH-J, which is a deterministic algorithm, the comparisons for
SGS-ES, NSGA-III and MOEA/D were obtained from the results produced by these methods in 10 runs. Each diagram plots a lower
and an upper line that respectively connect the best and worst
points attained by the compared methods in all the runs. The plots
also show a dashed line corresponding to the median attained by

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

431

Table 5.6
Comparison of Hypervolume and quality indices of SGS-ES, CH-J, NSGA-III and MOEA/D for the VLS instances.
Instance

Hypervolume

Purity

DR

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90

0.8197
0.8295
0.7660
0.7862
0.7245
0.8015
0.7581
0.7390
0.7368
0.7525
0.8098
0.8734
0.7979
0.8509
0.7879
0.8505
0.7478
0.7890
0.7465
0.8157
0.8205
0.8650
0.8200
0.8292
0.8239
0.8317
0.8090
0.8372
0.7629
0.8093

0.8047
0.8172
0.7498
0.7695
0.7015
0.7835
0.7414
0.7136
0.7177
0.7282
0.7951
0.8629
0.7810
0.8415
0.7710
0.8394
0.7223
0.7716
0.7253
0.8011
0.8066
0.8562
0.8034
0.8169
0.8096
0.8202
0.7974
0.8251
0.7428
0.7948

0.8047
0.8172
0.7498
0.7695
0.7015
0.7835
0.7416
0.7138
0.7177
0.7282
0.7952
0.8630
0.7812
0.8416
0.7712
0.8396
0.7223
0.7716
0.7254
0.8012
0.8069
0.8563
0.8036
0.8169
0.8097
0.8202
0.7974
0.8251
0.7429
0.7949

0.8047
0.8172
0.7498
0.7695
0.7015
0.7835
0.7415
0.7137
0.7177
0.7282
0.7951
0.8630
0.7811
0.8416
0.7711
0.8395
0.7223
0.7716
0.7253
0.8011
0.8069
0.8563
0.8036
0.8169
0.8096
0.8202
0.7974
0.8251
0.7428
0.7949

1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
0.9964
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0
1.0 0 0 0

0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0058
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0038
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0

0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0058
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0038
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0

0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0058
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0038
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0

0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0
0.0 0 0 0

0.0118
0.0097
0.0113
0.0110
0.0171
0.0153
0.0105
0.0176
0.0131
0.0172
0.0106
0.0075
0.0111
0.0067
0.0114
0.0072
0.0176
0.0136
0.0141
0.0096
0.0090
0.0084
0.0111
0.0090
0.0102
0.0082
0.0081
0.0089
0.0147
0.0102

0.0117
0.0096
0.0113
0.0110
0.0171
0.0153
0.0106
0.0177
0.0131
0.0173
0.0107
0.0075
0.0112
0.0067
0.0115
0.0073
0.0176
0.0136
0.0142
0.0097
0.0089
0.0084
0.0109
0.0089
0.0102
0.0082
0.0081
0.0089
0.0146
0.0101

0.0118
0.0097
0.0113
0.0110
0.0171
0.0153
0.0105
0.0177
0.0131
0.0172
0.0107
0.0075
0.0112
0.0067
0.0115
0.0072
0.0176
0.0136
0.0141
0.0096
0.0089
0.0084
0.0109
0.0089
0.0102
0.0082
0.0081
0.0089
0.0147
0.0102

Avg
N.Best
p
Mean rank
Rank position

0.7997
30

0.7837
0

0.7838
0
1.66E-17
1.5323
2.4335
3
2

0.7838
0

0.9999
30

0.0 0 03
0

0.0 0 03
0

0.0 0 0 0
30

0.0114
0

4
1

2
2

2
2

1
1

2.95
3

0.0114
0
2.39E-15
3.05
3

0.0114
0

2.0323
2, 3

0.0 0 03
0
2.19E-19
2
2

4
1

3
3

Table 5.7
Comparison of distribution indices and CPU time of SGS-ES. CH-J. NSGA-III and MOEA/D for the VLS instances.
Instance

D2

Min Spacing

CPU

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

SGS-ES

CH-J

NSGA-III

MOEA/D

61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90

1.0602
1.0119
0.8898
0.9226
0.8744
0.9823
0.8073
0.8607
0.8101
0.8576
0.9612
1.0414
0.9906
1.0319
0.9003
0.9747
0.8656
0.9621
0.8274
0.9324
0.9468
1.1053
1.0663
0.9831
1.0316
0.9742
0.9481
1.0088
0.9555
1.0377

1.0473
1.0496
0.8261
0.8744
0.9017
1.0137
0.7758
0.8158
0.7642
0.8543
0.9179
1.0363
0.9181
1.0087
0.8709
0.9768
0.8515
0.9338
0.7902
0.9018
0.9066
1.1475
1.0155
0.9649
1.0017
0.9830
0.9275
1.0092
0.9294
1.0098

1.0459
1.0464
0.8256
0.9106
0.9005
1.0132
0.7919
0.8333
0.7625
0.8780
0.9734
1.0323
0.9536
1.0087
0.8948
0.9945
0.8510
0.9338
0.8018
0.9218
0.9523
1.1439
1.0145
0.9666
1.0243
0.9828
0.9276
1.0047
0.9275
1.0089

1.0471
1.0496
0.8255
0.8880
0.9017
1.0137
0.7892
0.8314
0.7626
0.8794
0.9788
1.0335
0.9519
1.0087
0.8977
0.9922
0.8511
0.9338
0.7966
0.9127
0.9528
1.1441
1.0146
0.9669
1.0186
0.9830
0.9275
1.0055
0.9293
1.0098

0.0077
0.0055
0.0055
0.0051
0.0059
0.0056
0.0053
0.0039
0.0054
0.0043
0.0076
0.0084
0.0068
0.0079
0.0064
0.0074
0.0057
0.0052
0.0053
0.0054
0.0096
0.0081
0.0077
0.0061
0.0071
0.0058
0.0072
0.0061
0.0070
0.0052

0.0073
0.0053
0.0056
0.0043
0.0056
0.0053
0.0054
0.0037
0.0056
0.0040
0.0071
0.0084
0.0072
0.0078
0.0061
0.0075
0.0055
0.0047
0.0051
0.0055
0.0084
0.0077
0.0078
0.0058
0.0069
0.0055
0.0068
0.0059
0.0066
0.0054

0.0073
0.0054
0.0056
0.0059
0.0056
0.0053
0.0062
0.0041
0.0055
0.0049
0.0097
0.0084
0.0083
0.0078
0.0070
0.0081
0.0055
0.0047
0.0058
0.0062
0.0115
0.0077
0.0079
0.0058
0.0079
0.0055
0.0068
0.0059
0.0066
0.0054

0.0073
0.0053
0.0056
0.0051
0.0056
0.0053
0.0062
0.0043
0.0055
0.0051
0.0101
0.0084
0.0084
0.0078
0.0072
0.0081
0.0055
0.0047
0.0055
0.0059
0.0116
0.0077
0.0079
0.0058
0.0077
0.0055
0.0068
0.0059
0.0066
0.0054

21.7450
62.3640
25.8207
57.0123
30.4711
75.7831
25.9146
84.8752
25.9769
90.3612
25.2129
65.3719
30.7839
77.8728
34.7806
92.2981
37.2449
107.1587
45.8857
101.0368
37.5365
92.0232
42.3040
113.6161
49.3493
129.1932
52.3694
149.7154
72.6986
161.0501

50.1929
472.9695
38.8928
457.8403
46.5792
294.5378
61.7673
321.0555
69.9960
333.5820
77.2715
129.7969
55.2623
186.2354
53.0671
100.0133
79.5971
378.6946
52.1700
228.2797
54.1488
369.0146
74.4537
351.1298
62.4446
180.4264
126.2987
300.2133
46.6116
285.6970

58.8327
327.7931
51.8122
312.8328
61.1699
215.1681
73.8247
244.1829
81.8046
254.6311
77.8492
108.7024
64.4688
145.0289
65.9283
94.9817
86.5105
267.8694
71.6422
187.8734
60.3279
254.4615
77.4552
248.0501
72.6152
145.6146
119.3945
229.4651
68.8165
220.1420

66.7168
488.7253
58.2162
476.2181
67.6016
314.6727
86.6843
344.4683
99.3700
362.0777
94.0222
147.3442
75.9908
206.7596
77.1399
124.1663
105.8310
405.3375
83.8278
261.1875
75.1196
389.2578
98.9680
375.9355
89.6216
207.6757
156.4167
330.7565
83.1229
323.1561

Avg
N.Best
p
Mean rank
Rank position

0.9541
6

0.9341
15

0.9442
8
0.0056
2.1667
2.1667
2
1

0.9432
3

0.0063
8

0.0061
15

0.0066
8

67.2609
29

2.6333
2

2.75
2

1.0667
1

177.9413
144.9750
1
0
1.02E-16
2.5
2.4333
2
2

202.5463
0

2.5
1

0.0066
2
0.0049
1.8667
2.75
1
2

3.1667
3

4
3

432

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

Fig. 5.1. The Diff-EAF plots comparing SGS-ES with CH-J, NSGA-III and MOEA/D for the medium-large instance 49.

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

each algorithm. The areas highlighted with different grey levels
show the points where the EAF of an algorithm is larger than the
one of the compared algorithm of at least 20% (the darker is the
area, the larger is the difference). As we can observe in all the pairs
of diagrams, SGS-ES always produced better results than the compared algorithms, conﬁrming the conclusions about its effectiveness. As already pointed out, a thorough analysis using Diff-EAFs
is not practical; however, we can report that the results obtained
considering a sample of several instances produced outcomes similar to the ones in Fig. 5.1.
6. Conclusions
In this paper we present an approach to solve the bi-objective
scheduling problem proposed by Wang et al. (2018). This problem
belongs to the class of green scheduling or energy-aware scheduling, since it aims at reducing the impact of the associated manufacturing production on the environment due to the energy consumption. To this end, we deﬁned SGH as the extended and revised version of the constructive heuristic proposed in Wang et al.
(2018), and we employed it in a multi-objective scheduling algorithm, SGS, that we signiﬁcantly enhanced by means of ES, a novel
local search. The resulting algorithm, SGS-ES, was compared to
CH and two multi-objective evolutionary approaches, NSGA-III and
MOEA/D, with tests on the MLS instances proposed by Wang et al.
(2018), and on a new set of VLS instances. The obtained results
show that SGS-ES is signiﬁcantly better than the other considered
approaches. The results of CH were obtained by reimplementing it,
while correcting the feasibility problem aﬄicting the original implementation. As the experimental results show, such problem is
highly relevant for the set of very large-scale instances. The experimental campaign leads us to conclude that SGS-ES is an effective
approach for energy-aware and green scheduling on parallel machines in presence of TOU energy prices, since it allows to reduce
energy consumption while yielding overall better solutions. Finally,
future developments may consist in including additional features
to the problem in order to model some other realistic situations. In
particular, we prospect the possibility of considering non-identical
machines, sequence and machine-dependent setup times, as well
as job-dependent energy consumption.
References
Alhadi, G., Kacem, I., Laroche, P., & Osman, I. M. (2020). Approximation algorithms
for minimizing the maximum lateness and makespan on parallel machines. Annals of Operations Research, 285(1-2), 369–395.
Bandyopadhyay, S., Pal, S. K., & Aruna, B. (2004). Quantitative indices, and pattern
classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions On Systems, Man, And Cybernetics, 34(5), 2088–
2099. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMCB.2004.834438.
Branke, J., Deb, K., Miettinen, K., & Slowiński, R. (2008). Multiobjective Optimization:
Interactive and Evolutionary Approaches. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Bruzzone, A. A. G., Anghinolﬁ, D., Paolucci, M., & Tonelli, F. (2012). Energy aware
scheduling for improving manufacturing process sustainability: a mathematical model for ﬂexible ﬂow shops. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology, 61(1),
459–462. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2012.03.084.
Che, A., Wu, X., Peng, J., & Yan, P. (2017a). Energy-eﬃcient bi-objective singlemachine scheduling with power-down mechanism. Computers & Operations Research, 85, 172–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2017.04.004.
Che, A., Zhang, S., & Wu, X. (2017b). Energy-conscious unrelated parallel machine
scheduling under time-of-use electricity tariffs. Journal of Cleaner Production,
156, 688–697. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.04.018.
Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L., & Stein, C. (2009). Introduction to Algorithms. MIT Press.
Cota, L. P., Guimarães, F. G., Ribeiro, R. G., Meneghini, I. R., de Oliveira, F. B.,
Souza, M. J. F., & Siarry, P. (2019). An adaptive multi-objective algorithm based
on decomposition and large neighborhood search for a green machine scheduling problem. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 51, 100601.
Da Fonseca, V. G., Fonseca, C. M., & Hall, A. O. (2001). Inferential performance
assessment of stochastic optimisers and the attainment function. In Proceedings of the international conference on evolutionary multi-criterion optimization
(pp. 213–225). Springer.
Deb, K., & Jain, H. (2013). An evolutionary many-objective optimization algorithm
using reference-point-based nondominated sorting approach, part i: solving

433

problems with box constraints. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation,
18(4), 577–601.
Deb, K., & Jain, H. (2014). An evolutionary many-objective optimization algorithm
using reference-point-based nondominated sorting approach, part i: Solving
problems with box constraints. IEEE Transaction on Evolutionary Computation,
18(4), 577–601. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.2013.2281535.
Deb, K., Pratap, A., Agarwal, S., & Meyarivan, T. (2002). A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-II. IEEE Transaction on Evolutionary Computation,
6(2), 182–197. https://doi.org/10.1109/4235.996017.
Despeisse, M., Ball, P. D., Evans, S., & Levers, A. (2012). Industrial ecology at factory
level - a conceptual model. Journal of Cleaner Production, 31, 30–39. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.02.027.
Ding, J., Song, S., Zhang, R., Chiong, R., & Wu, C. (2016). Parallel machine scheduling
under time-of-use electricity prices: new models and optimization approaches.
IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 13(2), 1138–1154. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2015.2495328.
Fang, K., & Lin, B. (2013). Parallel-machine scheduling to minimize tardiness penalty
and power cost. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 64(1), 224–234. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cie.2012.10.002.
Fang, K., Uhan, N. A., Zhao, F., & Sutherland, J. W. (2013). Flow shop scheduling with
peak power consumption constraints. Annals of Operations Research, 206, 115–
145. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479- 012- 1294- z.
Gahm, C., Denz, F., Dirr, M., & Tuma, A. (2016). Energy-eﬃcient scheduling in manufacturing companies: a review and research framework. European Journal of
Operational Research, 248(3), 744–757. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.07.017.
Giglio, D., Paolucci, M., & Roshani, A. (2017). Integrated lot sizing and energy eﬃcient job shop scheduling problem in manufacturing/remanufacturing systems.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 148, 624–641. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.
01.166.
Giret, A., Trentesaux, D., & Prabhu, V. (2015). Sustainability in manufacturing operations scheduling: a state of the art review. Journal of Manufacturing Systems,
37(1), 126–140.
Ishibuchi, H., Yoshida, T., & Murata, T. (2003). Balance between genetic search and
local search in memetic algorithms for multiobjective permutation ﬂowshop
scheduling. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 7(2), 204–223.
Ji, M., Wang, J., & Lee, W. (2013). Minimizing resource consumption on uniform parallel machines with abound on makespan. Computers & Operations Research, 40,
2970–2974.
Jia, Z.-h., Li, Y.-j., Li, K., & Chen, H.-p. (2020). Weak-restriction bi-objective optimization algorithm for scheduling with rejection on non-identical batch processing
machines. Applied Soft Computing, 86, 105914.
Li, K., Shi, Y., Yang, S., & Cheng, B. (2011). Parallel machine scheduling problem to
minimize the makespan with resource dependent processing times. Applied Soft
Computing, 11(8), 5551–5557.
Li, K., Zhang, X., Leung, J. Y.-T., & Yang, S. L. (2016). Parallel machine scheduling
problems in green manufacturing industry. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 38,
98–106.
Liu, Y., Dong, H., Lohse, N., & Petrovic, S. (2016). A multi-objective genetic algorithm
for optimisation of energy consumption and shop ﬂoor production performance.
International Journal of Production Economics, 179, 259–272.
López-Ibánez, M., Paquete, L., & Stützle, T. (2006). Hybrid population-based algorithms for the bi-objective quadratic assignment problem. Journal of Mathematical Modelling and Algorithms, 5(1), 111–137.
López-Ibánez, M., Paquete, L., & Stützle, T. (2010). Exploratory analysis of stochastic
local search algorithms in biobjective optimization. In Experimental methods for
the analysis of optimization algorithms (pp. 209–222). Springer.
Lu, C., Gao, L., Li, X., Pan, Q., & Wang, Q. (2017). Energy-eﬃcient permutation ﬂow
shop scheduling problem using a hybrid multi-objective backtracking search algorithm. Journal of Cleaner Production, 144, 228–238.
Lu, C., Gao, L., Li, X., Zheng, J., & Gong, W. (2018). A multi-objective approach to
welding shop scheduling for makespan, noise pollution and energy consumption. Journal of Cleaner Production, 196, 773–787.
Mansouri, S., Aktas, E., & Besikci, U. (2016). Green scheduling of a two-machine
ﬂowshop: Trade-off between makespan and energy consumption. European
Journal of Operational Research, 248(3), 772–788.
May, G., Stahl, B., Taisch, M., & Prabhu, V. (2015). Multi-objective genetic algorithm
for energy-eﬃcient job shop scheduling. International Journal of Production Research, 53(23), 7071–7089.
Meng, R., Rao, Y., & Luo, Q. (2020). Modeling and solving for bi-objective cutting
parallel machine scheduling problem. Annals of Operations Research, 285(1-2),
223–245.
Minella, G., Ruiz, R., & Ciavotta, M. (2011). Restarted iterated Pareto greedy algorithm for multi-objective ﬂowshop scheduling problems. Computers & Operations Research, 38(11), 1521–1533.
Mori, M., Fujishima, M., Inamasu, Y., & Oda, Y. (2011). A study on energy eﬃciency
improvement for machine tools. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology, 60(1),
145–148.
Mouzon, G., Yildirim, M. B., & Twomey, J. (2007). Operational methods for minimization of energy consumption of manufacturing equipment. International
Journal of Production Research, 45(18-19), 4247–4271.
Paolucci, M., Anghinolﬁ, D., & Tonelli, F. (2017). Energy-aware scheduling: a multi-objective extension of a scheduling support system for improving energy eﬃciency in a moulding industry. Soft Computing, 21, 3687–3698.
Pinedo, M. L. (2012). Scheduling: Theory, Algorithms, and Systems (4th). Springer.
Queiroz, T. A. d., & Mundim, L. R. (2020). Multiobjective pseudo-variable neighbor-

434

D. Anghinolﬁ, M. Paolucci and R. Ronco / European Journal of Operational Research 289 (2021) 416–434

hood descent for a bicriteria parallel machine scheduling problem with setup
time. International Transactions in Operational Research, 27(3), 1478–1500.
Safarzadeh, H., & Niaki, S. T. A. (2019). Bi-objective green scheduling in uniform
parallel machine environments. Journal of Cleaner Production, 210, 559–572.
Sedgewick, R., & Wayne, K. (2011). Algorithms (4th ed.).
Shao, W., Pi, D., & Shao, Z. (2019). A pareto-based estimation of distribution algorithm for solving multiobjective distributed no-wait ﬂow-shop scheduling problem with sequence-dependent setup time. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 16(3), 1344–1360.
Shrouf, F., Ordieres-Meré, J., García-Sanchez, A., & Ortega-Mier, M. (2014). Optimizing the production scheduling of a single machine to minimize total energy
consumption costs. Journal of Cleaner Production, 67, 197–207.
Tang, D., Dai, M., Salido, M., & Giret, A. (2016). Energy-eﬃcient dynamic scheduling
for a ﬂexible ﬂow shop using an improved particle swarm optimization. Computers in Industry, 81, 82–95.
Taticchi, P., Tonelli, F., & Pasqualino, R. (2013). Performance measurement of sustainable supply chains: a literature review and a research agenda. International
Journal of Productivity and Performance Management, 62(8), 782–804.
Wang, S., Wang, X., Yu, J., Ma, S., & Liu, M. (2018). Bi-objective identical parallel machine scheduling to minimize total energy consumption and makespan. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 193, 424–440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.05.056.

Wang, Y., Wang, M., & Lin, S. (2017). Selection of cutting conditions for power constrained parallel machine scheduling. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 43, 105–110.
Yeh, W.-C., Chuang, M.-C., & Lee, W. C. (2015). Uniform parallel machine scheduling with resource consumption constraint. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 39,
2131–2138.
Zeng, Y., Che, A., & Wu, X. (2018). Bi-objective scheduling on uniform parallel machines considering electricity cost. Engineering Optimization, 50(1), 19–36.
Zhang, H., Zhao, F., Fang, K., & Sutherland, J. W. (2014). Energy-conscious ﬂow
shop scheduling under time-of-use electricity tariffs. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology, 63(1), 37–40.
Zhang, Q., & Li, H. (2007). MOEA/D: A multiobjective evolutionary algorithm
based on decomposition. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 11(6),
712–731.
Zhang, R., & Chiong, R. (2016). Solving the energy-eﬃcient job shop scheduling
problem: a multi-objective genetic algorithm with enhanced local search for
minimizing the total weighted tardiness and total energy consumption. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 112, 3361–3375.
Zitzler, E., & Thiele, L. (1999). Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms: a comparative
case study and the strength pareto approach. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation, 3(4), 257–271.

